It is clear from the start that Preparation for the Next Life, the impressive debut novel by Atticus Lish, cannot have a happy ending. Illegal immigrant Zou Lei and Iraq war veteran Brad Skinner, both seeking refuge amid the wreckage of post-9/11 New York, come crashing together with the force of classical tragedy. Charged with breathless momentum, the book propels them towards a destiny as devastating as it is hopeful. 
 A half-Uighur, half-Han Chinese woman smuggled into the country in a truck, Zou is determined to survive whatever America throws at her. After three months in detention, she is released without explanation and finds her way to Queens, New York. “She was going to stay where everybody was illegal … get lost in the crowd and keep her head down. Forget living like an American. It was enough to be free and on the street.” 
 Former infantryman Skinner seems similarly driven by a nomadic spirit. Discharged after serving three tours in Iraq, he hitchhikes to New York where he and Zou become unlikely lovers, connecting over a shared obsession with fitness when they meet in the corridor of a condemned building. A deeper bond is forged through Zou’s desire to imagine a life spent “on the road together travelling from city to city, selling what they bought and traded … wearing sheath knives and cowboy hats and riding horses in a sun-filled land outside the reach of the authorities”. This romanticised vision of outlaw life, fusing Silk Road and wild west mythologies, will remain tragically unattainable. For Zou, such dreams offer only a fleeting escape from the drudgery of underpaid fast-food work, and little relief from her fears of a second arrest and deportation. 
 In juxtaposing the experiences of Zou and Skinner, the novel is attentive to the ways people forced to migrate in search of employment, or freedom, are ever subject to laws that place limits on their movement and restrict their opportunities. Zou’s “mother’s people came down from the steppe”, but were regarded by the Chinese as “peasants”, fit only to pick cotton. In America, Lish’s contemporary nomads – migrants and refugees – survive through menial and often illegal work, vulnerable to the cruelties of a system reliant on cheap labour, and in which Homeland Security raids routinely thin their ranks. 
 An army veteran’s life seems scarcely more secure. Skinner suffers from PTSD and is haunted by atrocities he witnessed and committed, some of which he reviews compulsively in videos on his laptop. Still healing from a mortar wound, his mind addled by beer and psychopharmaceuticals, he makes no attempt to find work, or to understand Zou’s predicament, instead passing his days lifting weights and getting high. He rents a basement room from the Murphy family, half-migrant itself, whose white-supremacist ex-con son seems bent on rape and pillage as a way of easing his own sense of alienation from the changing face of America. 
 When Skinner’s 9mm pistol appears in the first act it seems fated to go off in the third, but this is not a book driven by plot. Much of its beauty and insight into the ordinary dramas of life occurs in scenes that serve no larger narrative purpose, suggesting instead a journalistic will to record the fine-grained detail of New York’s immigrant neighbourhoods and the realities of exploitation and precariousness in the lives of America’s underclass. 
 In his determination to narrate America from the bottom, Lish seems influenced as much by Dickens as by American modernists such as Ralph Ellison and John Dos Passos. He has a faultless ear for the speech of New York’s working poor, and an eye for situations that repeat themselves endlessly in fast-food restaurants, bodegas and shoe stores, where disaffected and underpaid employees meet disillusioned and impoverished consumers at the sharp edge of American capitalism. 
 As the son of Gordon Lish, one of America’s most influential editors and father to Raymond Carver’s minimalism, it would have been more surprising if Atticus had not become a writer than that he has shrugged away the weight of this inheritance to produce a first novel as substantial and beguiling as Preparation for the Next Life. 
 Lish’s tough lyricism ultimately works to dissolve the barrier between book and reader, co-opting us into a great, multi-ethnic nomadic clan. “The late winter sun was up and shining on us all, the unamused females who did medical billing, the guys in do-rags and sideways hats, either truants or going to some kind of gig in a stockroom. Strong-jawed Central American men who worked construction … covered in dust.” 
 The drudgery of this life, providing scant reward other than survival on the barest terms, is an exile from happiness that Zou, in particular, seeks to overcome. Even in despair she is driven by hope, a belief that at the end of each shift, or 20-mile hike from job to home, there might yet be something better. This is, in the end, a profoundly political book. 
 
