Serious consideration of the gifts reserved for age is likely to be sobering. Les Murray does not deny it. Waiting for the Past takes in vertigo, sudden falls, diabetes, frequent night visits to the lavatory while “trying not to dot the floor // with little advance pees”. He writes of cancer as it was suffered in the days when it could scarcely be named, along with the question of care for the elderly – among whom he now numbers himself: 
 Like all Murray’s collections this one is dedicated “to the glory of God”, but there is no spiritual snobbery or filtering for suitably improving subjects: Murray speaks as he finds. If this can put him in a strangely reactionary position at times, it also signals his fidelity to the lives of the New South Wales farming people and other workers among whom he grew up and among whom he continues to belong. In “Growth” he recalls from childhood the last days of his maternal grandmother, who was: 
 That extraordinary, many-faceted last line is set in place as though it were the plainest sense because it is delivered in plain language. 
 Murray has remained in faithful proximity to speech, however complex the material may be. This fidelity seems to speak for a vocation of service rather than the desire for honour, power, riches, fame and love that Freud attributed to the artist. When Murray writes about a doomed steelworks it must seem timely to readers in Britain, who see a government unwilling to invest in saving Redcar yet prepared to bribe the Chinese to the tune of billions to build a nuclear power station. In the works the glare of the furnace is “intense as a searchlight / infinitely confined”, and: 
 The density of the material (both actual and verbal) is accommodated by the plainness of the sentence structure. When reading aloud, where some poets aim for glory, Murray can sound almost impatient of his own work, and in these lines the eventual resolving rhythm has to make a case for itself among solid, intransigent objects. It is almost but not quite too much. 
 Murray can also work with a much greater liquidity of movement. “I Wrote a Little Haiku” describes Mini&eacute; balls, fired from the Springfield rifles used by both sides in the American civil war, melting when the wood in which they have long been embedded is burned: the bullet that 
 “Annulled” is a startling and completely apt choice here: the slight remoteness of the Latinate word helps to avoid the moral insistence that can disarm poetry about war. We receive “annul” from the French annuller, which here plays off a secondary meaning (futurity) of “sera” to suggest marriages ended or as yet unmade, and children never to be born. Murray has always had metaphysical interests, but sometimes he is also a metaphysical poet in method, and in this role shows how poetry can do things largely beyond the compass of other literary forms. Here, for example, he makes etymology into a mode of revelation. 
 Not all of Waiting for the Past operates at this level of distinction: there are a few poems that feel like products of artistic habit, as is perhaps inevitable in a poet as prolific as Murray. But time after time we encounter that familiar convergence of artistic authority and modesty of tone that in turn produces the matter-of-fact extravagance that has made earlier poems such as “The Dream of Wearing Shorts Forever” and “The Quality of Sprawl” so well loved. 
 It has been the fate of many poets to find that the world is at once too much and not enough, to be driven to suicide and madness, or to the creation of hermetic works or mythologies, secondary worlds that overlay or displace the unaccommodating original. We might say that Murray’s Catholic faith serves as a mythology whose scope he sees as requiring no adjustment. What we definitely can say is that the world Murray renders is close at hand even for the remotest reader. It is completely lived in. It is handled, worked, scented, mapped, celebrated, lamented, and its people honoured in both presence and memory. Murray’s way is not the only way, but it is a wonderful achievement. 
 
