There is a dark secret lurking behind every critique of technology, and the secret is us. Smartphones, CPUs and algorithms may indeed be inescapable in modern life, but they are ubiquitous because we demand them. We like our newly endless capacity for self-photography. We like our ability to weigh in, to be consulted, everywhere, all the time. We like the friendships we develop online, however odd, thin or ephemeral. So it isn’t the machines that are coming for us. We are coming for ourselves. 
 Louisa Hall’s Speak is an intelligent and absorbing look at our secret. You could be forgiven, at first, for taking it for a dystopian novel. It shows us a future circa 2040 where humanity has just fought off a serious addiction to robots. Babybots, as these doll-like things are called, are already on their way to obsolescence in vast warehouses as the book opens. They have been confiscated from the children who adored them, left to run their algorithms only for their own benefit as their power cells gradually run down. “In memory, though not in experience, I have lived across centuries,” one tells us, en route to oblivion. “I lay in one child’s arms. She said my name and I answered.” 
 But though babybots speak in the cadences of lesser gods, in Hall’s imagined world, they aren’t villains. Their programmed consciousness – if you can call it consciousness, an open question for everyone in this book – is instead the culmination of a human longing for love and connection that stretches across centuries. This longing has roots all the way back in the diary of a 17th-century Englishwoman sent off to colonise America named Mary Bradford. It also governed the life of Alan Turing, represented here in (fictional) letters to the mother of his childhood love Christopher Morcom. We also meet the Dettmans, a couple who become involved, and then disenchanted, in the gradual, decades-long programming of MARY, the computer program that a man named Stephen Chinn will eventually refine into the MARY3 script of the dolls. The last of the book’s characters is a paralyzed young girl named Gaby, who comes to us by way of trial transcripts. 
 If this is beginning to sound very much like a David Mitchell novel, well, yes, Speak does owe a heavy debt to him, and not just in its puzzle-piece construction out of “documents.” Like Cloud Atlas, Speak has a theme which, if you try to state it too plainly, begins to sound like a particularly simple bit of self-help: we are all lonely, we all need to feel connected and understood. If we can’t get that through interactions with other people, we will seek it out any way we can. 
 Hall even goes a bit further, presenting her scientists and mathematicians as merely surfacing, in their formulae and computer scripts, patterns of connection that are already there. “When I grow tired, I lie down in the pastures amongst befuddled sheep, and I summon Chris to help me sort through the strand of numbers crossing the sky,” Turing muses in an early letter. “I think, though this may sound strange, that I’ve absorbed some of his mind – some of his patterns of thought – into my brain.” Chinn’s early work is on what he calls the “seduction equation”, calculated from “examples of exciting conversations as I’d read them in novels, witnessed them in crowded restaurants, eavesdropped on them in lines at the grocery store.” 
 Given that contemporary novelists on the whole can be a bit down at the mouth about technology, Hall’s gentler view can be a welcome qualifier. But there is something missing here; bluntly, it’s power. Literally no one in this novel seems interested in technology as a means of control. In fact, the political structure of this future is left largely vague and occluded. There are mentions of a “Recession” which led to the monetization of “transport rights”, and the landscape is clearly ravaged by pollution. That’s as specific as things get. 
 Obviously the paralysis afflicting children is a bad outcome, as are the failed marriages of the book, but everywhere in Hall’s book these are the byproducts of good intentions. Even Chinn means well, eventually tiring of what he calls his “rote seduction”. No one, not even the Dettmans in their disintegrating marriage, so much as accuses each other of manipulation. 
 Regardless, Speak is a hypnotic read, and while you’re in its grip the thinness of its philosophy won’t bother you much. Also a poet, and once a student of Seamus Heaney’s, Hall has a knack for the precise, underwritten image. The ugliness of the term “babybot” is an odd misstep, though perhaps Hall means to signal the vulgarity of Chinn’s invention by way of its hard consonants. But it’s unclear because she gives Chinn enough articulation to observe the “mechanical cricket orchestra of my blasted formula” when he walks into bars. All her characters have this knack. “During dinner, father asks after my health in such a manner of concern that various parts threaten decay,” Mary Bradford observes at sea. 
 Turing has a poetic bent here too, even when made miserable by chemical castration: “My every cell has anchored itself to the ground. My gravity is astonishing.” So is Hall’s talent. One looks forward to its next adventure. 
 