In the title poem of his 1960 collection Landessprache ( Language of the Country ) Hans Magnus Enzensberger examines divided postwar Germany, in particular the west, where the economic recovery enabled consumerism to distract the population from an immediate past that many preferred not to dwell on. Enzensberger is brutally frank. His country is a “murderers’ den / where in haste and impotence the calendar tears its own leaves, / where the past rots and reeks in the rubbish disposal unit / and the future grits its false teeth, / … all because things are looking up …” 
 This sense of things seems to have been both widespread and unpopular. To say, as Enzensberger did, that “it was like living with an enormous corpse in the cupboard” was to risk the disfavour of a state whose immediate predecessor had been in the habit of burning books and killing writers along with anyone else it cared to get hold of. The conservative politician Franz-Josef Strauss, a veteran of the Russian Front and rival of Helmut Kohl, referred to Enzensberger, Guenter Grass and Heinrich Boell as Schmeissfliegen: blowflies. 
 It is hard to imagine a cultural row having such significance in Britain. Some may find that reassuring, while others will see it as evidence of a persistent malaise, a blend of timidity, mean-spiritedness and servility, whose latest symptom is the 2015 general election. An Enzensberger looking at the English electorate might have reached for Yeats’s comments to the audience at the Abbey theatre in 1926: “You have disgraced yourselves again.” Certainly, Enzensberger does not see his task as being to comfort and beguile. His language often has a Brechtian plainness. “Karl Heinrich Marx” is an unadorned portrait by an idiosyncratic adherent: “I see you betrayed / by your disciples: / only your enemies / remained what they were”, but Enzensberger also reveals an affinity for the folktale and fable found in Grass’s poems. The disturbing “The Midwives” finds nurses bursting into houses to compel the birth of “white flesh / that survives a few dozen winters: / then it’s done for”. Later, they themselves “lame, in the moss / like sleepless ravens, chilly, stare at the pathless blank / ditch of the oncoming night.” This is something more than allegory; or rather, its allegorical dimension is only one element in a larger mystery, looking back to the Brothers Grimm and to Hoffman. 
 The impulse to demystify remains powerful, however. In his most famous collection, The Sinking of the Titanic (1978), “Cold Comfort”, translated, like much of his work, by Enzensberger himself, explains: “We have learned to our dismay / that there is no justice, / and furthermore, to our even greater dismay, / from informed sources beaming with satisfaction, / that nothing remotely like it / can, should or ever will exist.” The legalistic relish in the closing line of Enzensberger’s own translation sounds even more coffin-closingly exact in the original, where the verb comes at the end: “auch nichts / dergleichen je geben kann, soll und wird”. If hopes for justice resided in the left, Enzensberger is too honest not to manifest his disillusion with a last outpost of Actually Existing Socialism, Castro’s Cuba: “A sleepwalker in front of 10 microphones / Is preaching to his tired island: / After me nothing will follow. / It is finished. / The machine-guns glisten with oil. / The shirts are sticky with cane-juice. / The prostate has had it.” 
 It is understandable, perhaps, if the poet is inclined thereafter to take a longer and longer view, to consider the cosmos, to indulge a reflexive irony about human conduct, with a subtext to the effect that socialism is too good for people because it asks too much of them. Curiously, the effect on the poems is not liberation from an inert fidelity but, at times, an expansive lassitude produced by a diminishing friction against the passage of history – as, of course, Enzensberger himself could have foretold, given his understanding of the pitfalls of an affluent “realism” about human affairs. 
 It is the fate of some major writers to be tempted into wisdom – the kind that short-circuits the poem by knowing too much at the outset, and which issues a sort of QED from the desk of Dr Enzensberger, the kind of thing referred to by Auden as “reams of edifying and unreadable verse”. So there are disappointing stretches in the second half of this book. But there are also bright exceptions, such as parts of “Ode to Stupidity”: “Mighty twin sister of intelligence, holding hands / together with her you celebrate the dim-witted palaver.” And “The Tin Plate” reclaims a mordant plainness in order to suggest the chain of unreflective association by which our fundamental curse, the persistence and enforcement of poverty, is made to seem irremediable: “About poverty, all has been said: / that it’s tenacious, sticky, persistent / and of no interest to anybody / save the poor. It is boring. / It has too much to worry about / to complain about boredom. / Like dirt, it is to be found / way down. It’s contagious, / smelly, a nuisance.” Savage, funny, exact, widely informed, immune to sentiment, Enzensberger is the kind of public author we could do with here and now. 
 
