Achieving “cultural significance”, Nell Zink wrote recently on BuzzFeed, is looking like the best job she has ever had. “My social status in the last year has gone from zero to hero. Where will it all end?” Strangers organise dinners in her honour. “I was invited to the Edinburgh festival! A photo editor asked me who she should book for makeup and hair!” A year ago, Zink was a little-known expatriate American living in Germany, working as a translator, contributing the occasional loopy essay to n+1, the Brooklyn-based radical magazine. Then her friend Jonathan Franzen helped her to get her novel published, and when she’s not getting called “the new Kafka” she is, as she says, being “hailed as a genius”. 
 Over the past year, Zink has published not one novel but two. The Wallcreeper came out last year from the small American press Dorothy and is now reprinted in a UK edition, back to back with a second book, Mislaid. They are two very different books, but both are prodigiously intelligent and odd. Zink’s friendship with Franzen began with an email correspondence about endangered birds – “ludicrously tragic animals”, as she calls them – and although The Wallcreeper is easily the more ornithological of the two, they share a frantic, sometimes bitter, distress about the condition of the world’s creatures and their filthy habitats, choked and dying. Humans, too, are watched closely, and their behaviours noted, especially when performing uncomfortable sex acts. 
 “A dubstep novel with a bird in it”: that’s one of the ways Zink describes The Wallcreeper. The bird bit has to do with the wallcreeper of the title, Tichodroma muraria, a small and red-winged relative of the sparrow that lives in the high mountains of central Europe. The dubstep has a little to do with the narrator’s husband, who moonlights as a DJ, but is mostly a reference to the novel’s method, which is fast, brainy, choppy, arrhythmic, more European than American in influence, and unusually non-humanist in emphasis, with a heroine described as living in “a naturally occurring k-hole” and a great many narrative bumps and shocks. 
 The first shock comes in the first sentence: “I was looking at the map when Stephen swerved, hit the rock, and occasioned the miscarriage.” The “I” is Tiffany, who was working at a pharmaceutical company when she met Stephen; the pair married and relocated to Berne, Switzerland, where the husband spots the bird and prangs the car. The wallcreeper is injured and comes home with them; the wife cries for her baby “like a drift log in heavy surf”. They pin up pegboard for the bird to peck at, poking bacon in the tiny holes; Stephen is so thrilled by this, he enters his wife anally without permission, a “metaphoric auto-da-f&eacute; [becoming] a thick one-to-one description of taking a dump”. The marriage continues but never recovers, though husband and wife will reunite somewhat over a campaign to return the industrialised rivers of Europe to “majestic panoramas of mud where birds could plunge their beaks”. Zink herself has described the novel as “a tortured autobiography in impenetrable code”. 
 Mislaid is also presumably autobiographical in some way, being set in the 1960s in rural Virginia, where Zink herself grew up. It is structured like a screwball comic opera, only with reversals not of disguise and gender but sexual orientation and race, and happens mostly on and around the “fall line” – where rivers tumble off the high ground to the plains below – just as the American south is being dragged kicking and screaming to desegregate its schools. 
 The main character is a girl called Peggy, who worries that she may be a man until she discovers “thespianism” at a private women’s college. Except that Peggy then has lots of sex with Lee Fleming, the college’s token famous poet, who most of the time is an active and popular homosexual: “His penis was buying entire weeks on skis.” Unfortunately, by the time Peggy realises this, she is married with two children: “For a lesbian, Lee’s house was cold turkey. You could go months without seeing a woman. Not that it mattered if your plan of being a pencil-thin seductress had unexpectedly given way to frying pancakes in a plaid bathrobe.” 
 And so Peggy runs off, taking her daughter with her but leaving her son behind. She covers her tracks – and gets a school place for her daughter – by stealing the birth certificate and identity of a dead black girl called Karen Brown. “Maybe you have to be from the south to get your head round blond black people … But a close look revealed it was true.” Peggy’s “knobby heel bones” are signs of black ancestry, think the locals, and “the daughter was one of those pallid, yellow-haired black kids you sometimes see”. So Peggy makes herself a new life as a rural drug-dealer, and Karen grows up “perfect (adorably wee and blond) yet marked for failure (black and dressed in rags)”. 
 It has been quite strange watching the American reviewers trying to make sense of all this by pondering what they think is happening in Peggy’s inner life. Zink may or may not be “the new Kafka”, but one thing she certainly isn’t is a humanist-realist: she’s simply not interested in motivation or psychology in that way. What she’s into instead is words, mainly, and ideas, and possible new structures, given shape in some amazing sentences: “Holding her child in her arms, clueless Meg pondered the opportunity costs of childhood in a world without sidewalks.” “His thoughts on his back porch surrounded him like a carpet of mice.” The politics are sophisticated, but abstract and attenuated – sketches, not history painting. And as the plot thickens and the focus moves from the parents’ generation to the children, the story becomes sentimental and cartoonish in a way you might find captivating or disappointing, depending on your taste. 
 It’s very unusual, as Christian Lorentzen has said in New York magazine, to read an American novelist so disdaining the middle-class America that most writers try to write about. In The Wallcreeper this rejection is fairly absolute, and takes the narrator further and further out of the life she started off with, in a way that is both plausible and poetic. Mislaid, on the other hand, seems to me to avoid middle classness mainly by allowing its main characters to inherit great wealth. It is good fun and spectacularly clever, but succeeds in making racism look extremely silly at the expense of getting a bit too silly itself. 
 But maybe endings don’t matter when the sentences in the lead-up are so good. Peggy, for example, taking advice from her girlfriend on her life’s dream of living in New York as a playwright: “Audiences love watching women but actors hate being sidelined. That’s why all the great female roles predate actresses. Antigone was a guy in a mask. Portia was a guy in a dress. So don’t sideline your actors.” Zink’s work is not tender, elegant, disciplined or classically proportioned, but it is clever, fierce, striking and original. So much so that it makes tender, elegant and so on look quite dull. 
 
