Crime solvers come in all shapes and sizes, from the demure knitter Miss Marple to the besieged Clara Starling. They are divorcees, smokers, alcoholics, recovering alcoholics, drug abusers, bent cops and vigilantes. How does an unpublished writer make her sleuth stand out in a field littered with the detritus of human depravity? 
 A clue to the freshness of JM Green’s writing is that Good Money, the first in the Stella Hardy series, was shortlisted in 2014 for the Victorian premier’s literary award for an unpublished manuscript. This quickly led to a two-book deal. 
 Stella Hardy is a fortysomething social worker whose territory is the western suburbs of Melbourne. She works for the Western Outer-Region Migrant Support unit, or WORMS, which is short on funding and long on clients. Since the failure of her relationship with a married man, Stella’s been nursing her way through with vast quantities of cask wine and the occasional bottle of whisky. Her best friend, senior constable Phuong Nguyen, is no longer talking to her. When she gets a 4am phone call to attend a client whose young son has just been murdered, she notes the housing commission flat is bigger than the one she owns and has better views of the city. Stella Hardy is pretty much at rock bottom. 
 And despite her crime-solving skills, Green ends the novel with Hardy still there. Where would the fun be in climbing out of the hole? In the meantime, Hardy engages with petty criminals, mining barons on the take, a missing neighbour and the dire social consequences of criminals preying on young immigrant boys who dare to dream of a better future. 
 These are the ingredients of countless crime novels, so what makes Good Money stand out? For starters, there’s an unashamed humour to Green’s writing. When the corrupt police minister comes to launch a new initiative, it too has the risible acronym of JUNKIE or Justice Uniting Neighbourhood Knowledge with Inter-agency Expertise. 
 Stella’s miserable attempts to get her act together demonstrate Green’s affection for her protagonist. A potential love interest brings its own problems, as does a brother just out of jail. Low on energy, Stella struggles to empathise with anyone. But Green, a librarian by trade, lives and works in the western Melbourne suburbs. She witnesses first hand the frontline of poverty, newly arrived immigrants and social discord. Given this knowledge, for Hardy to be upbeat would be wrong. 
 In this, Green typifies recent Australian crime writing. Stella Hardy straddles the social divide. With her own life in tatters, she is not so distanced from the social and economic dysfunction of her clients’ experience. 
 Another recent release, Anne Buist’s Medea’s Curse, has forensic psychiatrist Natalie King dealing in the awful sphere of perinatal psychiatry, women suffering from postpartum depressionand murder, only in the realm of innocent children and babies. But Buist is more concerned in showing how women end up with the wrong partners, carrying the baggage of dreadful upbringings and the dire social consequences of both. 
 Meanwhile Nigel Bartlett’s King of the Road has an unwitting crime-solver in the guise of David Kingsgrove, a gay man who turns vigilante when accused of kidnapping his nephew. Bartlett studies the live topic of children groomed via social media and the stereotyping of gay men as predators. 
 Green, Buist and Bartlett are dealing with crime of the here and now. Dreaming up brutal ways to torture and murder victims is not their focus; their purview is the role of society in creating cultural dysfunction. They steer away from stereotypes, immersing their characters in the very real world in which many readers live. The mean streets are in our suburbs and around the corner. This gives their writing an unsettling intimacy. No need for blood and guts when the crime you are reading could be happening in the flat next door. 
 Though a little slow to find its stride, Good Money soon becomes a page turner. And if the ending is a little farfetched, Green’s insistent tone makes it forgivable. The next Stella Hardy mystery, Too Easy, will see its protagonist dealing with street kids, corrupt cops, a bikie gang and a superstitious Vietnamese-Australian gambling addict. Whether Stella resolves her love life, tidies her flat and stops drinking cheap cask wine remains to be seen. Of course, as readers, we hope not. In the meantime, if you like your crime fiction to feel funny and real then Green has your measure. 
 