Jonathan Franzen ’s emergence as a great comic novelist coincided with the death of his father and the end of his childless, 12-year marriage in divorce. The Corrections of 2001 was in many ways a heartfelt fictional response to those inadvertently liberating events; it carried the mature writer’s sense of tragic absurdity, which finds its best expression in the things we do, willingly or not, for love. 
 The two novels Franzen published prior to The Corrections – Strong Motion and The Twenty-Seventh City – were too self-consciously advertisements for his technical gifts as a writer; clever without ever quite ringing true, the risks they took were rarely those of self-exposure. Since The Corrections, Franzen has written determinedly with his ideal reader, a collaborator in nuance and drollery, in mind. 
 Contrary to hashtag perceptions of a certain aloofness or superiority in his own character (a reputation rooted in not much more than his widely quoted scepticism of TV chat shows and repeated wariness of the “liberating power” of the internet), his later writing has been characterised by an irresistible generosity of spirit. The ambitious author, the would-be Great American Novelist (as Time magazine dubbed Franzen in a cover line), is, in his novels, a dependable figure of fun. Purity ’s Charles Blenheim, the latest hope for American fiction, is left, after a long period of writer’s block, an overblown second novel and a midlife motorcycle accident, paralysed from the hips down, cuckolded by his younger wife and scrawling marginal notes to student essays. He attains, however, the ability to laugh at the ironies of the plot line he has been given (not least at the plague of literary “Jonathans” who dominate the books pages of the New York Times ). 
 Similar ludic qualities tempered the anger of Franzen’s second major book, Freedom, almost 10 years in the writing – anger directed against the forced polarities of George W Bush’s America. That redeeming humour also casts a light over every tribulation here. Franzen remains a wonderful satirical observer of the minutiae of middle American life, in particular as expressed in the complexity of familial relationships. His primary emotional landscape as a writer is that of the frustrations of duty, the refusal of the past to go away and, above all, of guilt at the impossibility of living up to parental or romantic ideals. 
 He consistently rejects the American dream of individuals as authors of their own destiny, however much his characters aspire to it. It is hard to read any of his books without the echo of Philip Larkin’s This Be the Verse somewhere in the background. His protagonists are always in hock to the unintended consequences of past actions and the life into which they were born; an anxiety that becomes symptomatic of a wider sense of American disquiet. 
 This novel opens, reassuringly, with one of those pitch-perfect mother and child conversations that are a Franzen signature tune. Purity Tyler is making a duty telephone call to the latest of the author’s maternal monsters who, we learn, has saddled her daughter not only with that name, but also the lifetime of unrealistic demands it represents. Purity calls herself Pip and the great expectations placed upon her are a recurrent theme. Franzen’s Dickensian ambitions do not stop there: the mother, Anabel, is a fully fledged Miss Havisham and there are, to boot, no shortage of far-fetched coincidences and shamelessly melodramatic plot twists as Pip tries to unravel the mystery of her disputed parentage. 
 Pip, who lives in a shared house with a curious alternative family of squatters and outcasts, is specifically in search of her father, whose identity her mother refuses to disclose beyond the sense that he is the source of her own desperate unhappiness. Pip’s quest, the sputtering motor of the novel’s plot, leads her first to the truth-telling Sunlight Project, a WikiLeaks-like cult in the jungle of Bolivia, led by a charismatic German internet guru, Andreas Wolf, and then back to Denver and a journalistic project to uncover the misappropriation of a nuclear warhead. Franzen is always ambitious to have his fiction catch the form and impression of his American times, and having taken on the sudden shift of wealth during the dotcom years, and the corruptions of the Bush-era war machine in his previous two books, here his characters find themselves engaged with the death of privacy and the paranoia-inducing connectivity of the social media age. 
 The novel is told in seven linked sections, using Franzen’s familiar device of competing vantage points on a shared history, moving back and forth in a timeline that takes in the events leading to Pip’s conception and the backstory of the charismatic Andreas Wolf, who grew up in the former East Germany, with a mission for truth-telling and a dark secret of his own. Franzen is a master of the involved set piece; the high comedy and torturous angst of the bedroom relationship of Pip’s parents – he a would-be journalist with ambitions to edit a magazine called the Complicator; she a self-denying heiress and conceptual artist who can only find sexual release during certain phases of the moon – is a particularly fabulous construction. 
 If Purity is in search of her own identity, everyone else, in different – hopeless – ways is in search of purity. Wolf’s efforts to expose all the world’s corruption have led him from one surveillance culture, the Stasi of the former GDR, to another in the diminishing returns of the worldwide web. Increasingly, he cannot see a distinction: both are systems “it was impossible to opt out of…” and “axiomatic to both was the idea that a new species of humanity was emerging. On this apparatchiks of every stripe agreed. It never seemed to bother them that their ruling elites consisted of the grasping, brutal old species of humanity…” 
 Franzen can be piercingly brilliant at deconstructing myths the culture tells about itself. There are many paragraphs in this book that read like inspired op-eds. You don’t read him for the polemic, however, but for the way he roots these ideas in his flawed and beguiling characters, and for the smile that haunts sentences that have the authentic cast of joined-up thoughts. In one of several throwaway “Twitter storms” that he has lately provoked, the author took issue with the idea of emoticons and all who believed in them, “because,” he said both mischievously and in earnest, “it takes 600 pages to convey emotion”. This novel, with its baggy plot and big heart and seductive intelligence, proves his point in a mere 563. 
 