The most important mystery writer in America by 1970 was Ross Macdonald, a pen name used by an self-effacing Canadian and former academic named Kenneth Millar. Years of high regard within genre circles had, to his surprise and delight, been upgraded to effusive reviews of his hard-boiled detective novels on the cover of the New York Times Book Review and multiple weeks spent on the bestseller lists. But nothing pleased Macdonald so much as when Eudora Welty, in an interview for her new novel Losing Battles in the NYTBR, admitted that she hadn’t mailed a fan letter to Macdonald, whose writing she’d loved from near the first, because she worried he would think it “icky”. 
 Macdonald, being less shy, sent Welty a fan letter of his own. With it, he began a decade-long correspondence which has now been collected in Meanwhile There are Letters, a fascinating, delightful, and often heartfelt book jointly edited by Suzanne Marrs, Welty’s friend and biographer, and Tom Nolan, Macdonald’s biographer. 
 The affection between Macdonald and Welty grew deeper with every letter. We get our first hint that they have progressed from mutual literary admiration to genuine friendship when Macdonald signs off his 27 April 1971 letter to her as “love, Ken”. (No doubt Welty’s glowing review of one of his novels, which ran on the cover of the NYTBR, helped.) These coy admissions of burgeoning love were woven into long discussions on writers from Ford Madox Ford (whom both revered) to Elizabeth Bowen to Katherine Anne Porter. They also discussed the mutual burdens of the publicity side of the writing life: critics and journalists both good and bad. 
 There is no small question of actual romance haunting these letters. Marrs and Nolan rather stack the deck in this regard, as they provide interstitial commentary. But the bare facts are these: Welty and Macdonald saw each other in person only sparingly. They met for the first time, almost by happenstance, at New York’s Algonquin Hotel in the fall of 1971. Welty visited him in Santa Barbara three times. It’s not a lot on which to build a case for a serious love affair. 
 Welty and Macdonald frequently mention his wife, the mystery writer Margaret Millar, in appreciative terms. Macdonald, as an aside in early 1973: “Margaret considers you the leading creative woman in the United States; and she doesn’t get any argument from me.” Welty, as much an early reader and fan of Millar’s work as she was Macdonald’s, expresses genuine interest in Margaret’s welfare. For years before she recovered and wrote mysteries to great acclaim, Margaret had a bit of a rough time: in 1970, the Millars’ trauma-ridden daughter Linda died in her sleep, then Margaret took a writing hiatus of six years, and suffered from ill health brought on by lung problems, skin cancer, and retinal damage. 
 Marrs and Nolan amp their star-crossed lover interpretation of the letters with anecdotal evidence of further affection. They relay, for example, Macdonald’s declaration to Reynolds Price that he may “love Eudora as a friend. I love her as a woman.” They highlight Millar’s propensity to belittle and insult her husband in public, and his relative passivity when she did so. And then there is this troubling encounter that Welty had with Millar at a writer’s conference in 1976: “For no reason at all once [Margaret] said to me, ‘When Ken is away, of course I open your letters to him, but only to see if there’s anything in them he needs to be informed about.’ I don’t know why she told me that, but – I don’t think she’d have ever found anything in any of them to give her pause.” 
 The biographers also try to portray Macdonald’s admission to Welty that a neighbor couple’s impending divorce and resulting good friendship “convinced me of what I didn’t use to believe, that divorce could be the suitable end of a marriage” as a “startling opinion” that illuminates growing romantic feelings. 
 But it’s equally plausible Macdonald was simply expressing wonder and bafflement over a nearby situation without necessarily intending to apply it to his own life. 
 It wouldn’t be long before any such ideas were completely moot: by the end of the 1970s, Macdonald’s mounting memory problems led to an Alzheimer’s diagnosis. Welty received his last mailed letter to her in April 1980 (there would be another, unsent, the following month: “I think you may understand, better than most, perhaps better than anyone, how hard it can become to speak after a lapse into silence”). She continued to send letters, knowing he could not answer them, full of anguish and real heartbreak. “In the deepest sense we could never be out of touch,” she wrote in April 1981. “In the daily, enduring way, I think of this too.” And in October: “I’m always sending [my love] to you myself. You are in my thoughts every day and dear to my heart.” 
 Macdonald died in 1983, but not before Welty was able to visit Santa Barbara one final time, clearly agitated and bereft at the loss of his faculties and the imminent end of their literary and personal friendship. For all that Nolan and Marrs tried to spin their connection as something more, perhaps the most convincing note was struck by Welty herself, in the unfinished short story Henry also included in the volume. The titular character, like Macdonald, is ravaged by Alzheimer’s, cared for by his overwhelmed wife Donna, and clearly loved by the narrator: “Henry in being so pre-eminently a married man was that much the dearer to me, for of course I knew it was this that made him need me.” 
 Perhaps the best answer to all of this is both less sordid and more simple than this volume’s editors expect: Welty and Macdonald were indeed in love. But it was a literary love, which stayed on the page where they both felt it belonged. 
 