When TS Eliot died, 50 years ago last month, the New York Times called him that “quiet, gray figure who gave new meaning to English-language poetry”. This June marks the centenary of the publication of “The Love Song of J Alfred Prufrock”, which, along with a few other early works including “Gerontion”, “Portrait of a Lady” and “Sweeney Among the Nightingales”, helped Eliot crack open modern poetry. Between 1915 and 1920, while rationing out a handful of radically innovative poems, Eliot published heaps of magisterially conservative literary criticism. Even before The Waste Land, he was famous enough to be parodied by Louis Untermeyer, who imagined “Einstein Among the Coffee Cups” in high Prufrockian style: “The night contracts. A warp in space / Has rumors of Correggio.” In late 1922 Eliot released The Waste Land into a world that seemed to be waiting, if not ready, for it. Joyce had published Ulysses that February; a few months later, Proust was finally translated into English, “so that even the French might read him”, quipped one American critic. “Modernism,” complained another, “they say, is in the air. So is the flu.” The Waste Land was heralded even before its publication as the poem that would epitomise this literary movement, the artistic source from which modernism could endlessly renew itself. Robert Crawford’s new biography, Young Eliot, takes its subject only as far as this momentous publication, ending with some sketchy gestures toward its initial reception. 
 Eliot has been the subject of comparatively few biographies: his will prohibited the use of quotation, forcing his first biographers to resort to paraphrase. This has helped entomb him culturally as the man in “a four-piece suit”, in Virginia Woolf’s phrase, with “his brow so grim / and his mouth so prim”, as he himself once joked. Crawford wants to rescue “the bankerly poet” from his sepulchre of priggishness, and inject some colour into the quiet grey figure. Trying to loosen Eliot up, Crawford familiarly calls him Tom, tells us (too) many times that he was mischievous and emphasises the bawdy verse he wrote as an undergraduate. He focuses primarily on the twin influences that Eliot’s upbringing as a shy (another constant word) child in a strict family, and his education, had on his imagination. Although Eliot knew that “literature is not primarily a matter of nationality, but of language”, he also understood the importance of place, insisting after 30 years as a British citizen that his poetry, “in its sources, in its emotional springs, it comes from America”. Seeking those sources, Crawford’s masterfully researched chronicle enriches the familiar story of Eliot’s early years in St Louis, education at Harvard and Oxford, travels on the continent and ultimate residence in London. The first biography permitted to quote extensively from Eliot’s language, Young Eliot finally brings the poet’s life-defining gift into the story. 
 Born in 1888 into an affluent, loving but highly correct family of Unitarians, Thomas Stearns Eliot was steeped in liberal theology from his earliest years, setting the stage for both his later conversion to high Anglicanism and his abiding interest in world religion. Eliot, who was born with a congenital hernia, wore a truss for years; few would dispute that this contributed to his sexual hesitancy, although his straitlaced upbringing didn’t help. Eliot’s father once described syphilis as “God’s punishment for nastiness”; if a cure were found, he argued, “it will be necessary to emasculate our children to keep them clean”. Unsurprisingly, sex may have remained a fraught issue for his son. 
 Quoting liberally from letters, memoirs, even student essays, Crawford diligently, and imaginatively, locates connections between the world Eliot encountered and the images used in his poems. “The soundscape of St Louis” in the late 19th century included Wagner, music hall and ragtime; all found their way into The Waste Land. Crawford has discovered in Eliot’s St Louis many of the names memorialised in his poems – Stetson, Sweany, even Prufrock. Some connections are more persuasive than others: linking “What the Thunder Said” to a devastating cyclone in 1896 may stretch the point, and I was delighted by Crawford’s belief that the “sultriness” of English summer temperatures that reached the 70s fahrenheit must have reminded Eliot of St Louis (during the 1904 World Fair, St Louis temperatures averaged above 100F). More convincing is the importance of the annual summers the Eliots spent in Massachusetts, where Tom became an expert sailor and lover of the “many-voiced” sea, a sensibility that infuses much of his work. 
 As an undergraduate at Harvard, Eliot stumbled on the French symbolists; Laforgue, especially, transformed his sense of what poetry could do, while Henry James taught him “how a New England inheritance might be fused with the sometimes scandalous stylishness of France”. He discovered Jessie L Weston, whose studies in folklore and ritual would so influence The Waste Land. After graduating, Eliot travelled abroad, attending lectures by Henri Bergson in Paris and hiring as his French tutor an aspiring novelist named Henri Alain-Fournier. Listening to Alain-Fournier and his friends, Eliot learned “not just how to improve his French but also how to raise his game”, writes Crawford, a trifle inelegantly. Eliot developed several friendships with other young writers, including the American poet Conrad Aiken and Jean Verdenal, who was killed in the first world war. He returned to Harvard to pursue a PhD in philosophy: “reading Bergson in French, then in English, he also read Patanjali in the original Pali, the Upanishads in Sanskrit, Heraclitus in Greek, Kant in German, Dante in Italian”, and Spinoza in “elegant 17th-century Latin”. His reading and thinking were promiscuous, even if his love life wasn’t: Eliot told one friend, “One must have theories, but one need not believe in them!” “No other major 20th-century poet was so thoroughly and strenuously educated,” Crawford declares, and it’s hard to disagree: Crawford barely has time to mention Yeats, Goethe, Milton, Browning, Spenser, Arnold, only touching on the vast catalogue of poets who influenced Eliot’s work. 
 Eliot enrolled at Oxford in 1914 to finish his PhD, and began to mingle in literary and artistic circles, befriended by Ezra Pound, Bertrand Russell, Ottoline Morrell and the Bloomsbury group; soon he met vivacious, highly strung Vivien Haigh-Wood. Most biographers concur that Eliot’s Boston friend Emily Hale was the great love of his early years; Crawford writes that he was “ineradicably smitten” with her (which seems both a mixed metaphor and demonstrably untrue, as Eliot later brutally rejected her). Eliot later wrote that after a year of marriage to Vivien, he discovered he was still in love with Hale; Vivien was also on the rebound, and the two near-strangers bounced into an impulsive, mutually destructive marriage that kept Eliot in England and spared him from becoming a philosophy professor at Harvard. It didn’t spare him much else, however, including Vivien’s almost immediate affair with Russell. Eliot found work as a schoolmaster, then in the foreign department at Lloyd’s Bank, while writing criticism, lecturing and painstakingly composing poetry amid a plague of domestic illnesses, hospitalisations and breakdowns. The particulars of the Eliots’ unhappy marriage and duelling illnesses (what Peter Ackroyd termed a maladie &agrave; deux ) comprise roughly half the current volume, but the vibrant, mercurial Vivien never quite lifts off Crawford’s page. Paralysis and stasis, timidity and inertia, the failure of nerve and the costly impulse that is later regretted, the terror of discovering a life unlived: these are the themes of Eliot’s poetry, and his life, in these years, as Crawford notes. But one waits in vain for such memorable insights as Cynthia Ozick ’s remark that Eliot’s tormented first marriage “blackened him metaphysically,” or Ackroyd’s sardonic observation that “a picture of Eliot in a prospect of drizzle evokes a quality in the man himself”. 
 Soon emotional and physical exhaustion tipped Eliot toward a breakdown; while he was recovering, he finished The Waste Land, by which time this formidably erudite poet had found a way to camouflage his emotions – not only about his personal life, but also about the precarious modern world – behind a screen of “impersonality”, universalising them through the filter of ancient myths and rituals. Eliot’s classicism has been viewed by others less positively, as “a full-scale retreat from the present tense”, in Michael Wood’s insightful formulation, part and parcel of his reactionary conservatism, of which his antisemitism was also a symptom. Crawford addresses the contentious issue of this antisemitism, but minimises it with weak-kneed words such as “unattractive” and “awkward”. Amid treasure troves of research are sprinkled some similarly supine observations: “Like most people, Tom was alert to a spectrum of sexual experience.” Or: “Unlike most folk, he was remarkably intelligent and had a genius for verse, but like the majority of people, he had public and private selves which could seem hard to reconcile.” It seems unremarkable that “Tom, too, however much he might recline smoking his cigarette in a Garsington summer deckchair, could be socially awkward”; more remarkable is discovering a poet of Eliot’s genius described as someone who “didn’t just like the clever-clever stuff”. But it is also true that most writers will pale beside Eliot. “Each venture,” he wrote much later, “is a new beginning, a raid on the inarticulate.” Certainly Crawford’s new beginning is a raid on the forced inarticulacy of past ventures, and likely to prove a definitive one for some time to come. 
 
