You make the dystopia you deserve. It’s the near future, and finance capitalism has pushed itself over the edge. The US is a rustbelt. Charmaine and Stan – we never learn their surname, which encourages a slightly patronising relationship with them – started out well: she worked for Ruby Slippers Retirement Homes and Clinics; he was in quality control at Dimple Robotics. Now they live in their car, just two ordinary Americans down on their luck. Charmaine maintains a “lightly positive tone” but misses her flowered throw pillows; Stan, though he “can lean to the mean when he’s irritated”, is a good man underneath, and feels he has let her down. They’re used to the smell, they’re used to being hungry. They have each other. They seem a little naive in the way they maintain their love as a bulwark against the world; and it is this naivety that makes them vulnerable when, in desperation, they join Positron, a socioeconomic experiment based around a privately funded postmodern prison. 
 At Positron everyone is employed to serve a month as an inmate and a month as staff, turn and turn about. You get everything you want from life, but onchangeover day you go to jail and a couple you are never allowed to meet or know – your “alternates” – live in your beautiful home and eat off your nice plates. It’s a cross between hotdesking and taking in one another’s laundry for a living. No one has committed a crime, but everyone has somehow been rendered guilty. 
 Charmaine proves to be “really good at believing” the corporate line. She loves Consilience, the prison town, with its 50s aesthetic “chosen because that was the decade in which most people had self-identified as being happy”, even though one of her duties is to perform euthanasia on misfits. Stan, more of a sceptic, runs the prison chicken farm. They don’t seem entirely suited to one another any more and, sure enough, after a few months at Positron, both become sexually obsessed with their alternates. From there it’s a bizarre spiral into infidelity and blackmail, plot and counterplot. Inside the prison management, no one is what they seem. Capitalism, biotech and neurotech are becoming the same thing: identity, existing solely as a sort of polite back-leakage from this energetic, finance-driven process, might best be summed up in a curious observation of Stan’s: “Would Doris Day’s life have been different,” he muses, “if she’d called herself Doris Night? Would she have worn black lace, dyed her hair red, sung torch songs?” By now, it is a less fatuous question than it seems. 
 The Heart Goes Last, originally written as an ebook serial, is a jarring, rewardingly strange piece of work. At first a classic Atwood dystopia, rationally imagined and developed, it relaxes suddenly into a kind of surrealist adventure. The satirical impulse foregrounds itself. Narrative drive ramps up, but in the service of something less like a novel than a political cartoon, in which raw inventiveness undercuts the very idea of story, revealing it to have been a fairly flimsy disguise all along. Atwood allows her sense of the absurd its full elbow room; her cheerfully caustic contempt – bestowed even-handedly on contemporary economics, retro culture, and the social and neurological determination of identity – goes unrestrained. The result, reminiscent of Russian author Victor Pelevin ’s superficially chaotic but linguistically controlled satires, is populated by gay Elvis impersonators, a Marilyn Monroe lookalike in love with a soft toy and a talking head in a box. It features mass production, in the Positron prison factories, of animatronic sex dolls, or “prostibots”. 
 If Atwood doesn’t quite attain Pelevin’s levels of ebullient despair, she matches him for savagery. During production the as-yet headless bodies of the prostibots, writhing and grinding through a test sequence, smell of plastic, a problem cured later in the process by the addition of an artificial pheromone. At that stage the customer is offered an additional choice of scent: orange blossom, rose, ylang-ylang, chocolate pudding or Old Spice. All good clean fun until you get to the “kiddybot” model, packaged in “white nighties and flannelette sheets”, with blue knitted teddy bear “for extra-realistic effect”. Even Stan’s co-workers – used to rationalising their own behaviour in accord with their needs – find this a bit close to the bone. But they don’t complain, and they certainly don’t refuse to manufacture the goods. Economic determinism drives change, and change must be good, even when it leads to neurologically imprinted sex slaves or rejuvenation biology based on babies’ blood. 
 Jubilant comedy of errors, bizarre bedroom farce, SF prison-break thriller, psychedelic 60s crime caper: The Heart Goes Last scampers in and out of all of these genres, pausing only to quote Milton on the loss of Eden or Shakespeare on weddings. Meanwhile, it performs a hard-eyed autopsy on themes of impersonation and self-impersonation, revealing so many layers of contemporary deception and self-deception that we don’t know whether to laugh or cry. Halfway through, Stan mourns his own life, which he sees now as being constructed of “debts, timetables, the need for money, the longing for comfort; the earworm of sex”. He has been, he thinks, “the puppet of his own constricted desires”. But his sense that he could somehow have avoided all that is rhetoric. All dependable descriptions of the world have been stolen from him by the fantasies of corporate language, aspiration, economics, what passes for politics: “All he sees is fog.” As distraught, charmless and confused as all the other inhabitants of Positron/Consilience, he and Charmaine are left to concentrate “on the chain of causes and effects and lies and impostures” that have connected the personal to the political and set the parameters of their dystopia. 
 
