Only in science fiction can the reader be greeted, two-thirds of the way through a giant novel, with a heading that reads “FIVE THOUSAND YEARS LATER”. Inevitably its appearance is slightly comical. And it is going to break up the story, because no one in the novel has found a scientific solution to ageing that will allow people to live indefinitely. Once you hit “FIVE THOUSAND YEARS LATER”, then, you can be sure that everyone the book has so far been trying to persuade you to care about, at greater length than most entire novels, is now long dead. 
 The potential disappointment is mitigated by the fact that, at the end of the first part, set in the very near future, nearly everyone is dead already. And by “everyone” I mean most of the human race. Up to this point, Seveneves has been a fascinating, breathtaking disaster novel that one-ups apocalyptic movies such as Armageddon or 2012 by subjecting humanity to an extinction-level event. 
 The story begins with admirable rhetorical swagger: “The moon blew up without warning and for no apparent reason.” Something – perhaps a tiny black hole – has caused the moon to fragment into large chunks. Then one chunk bashes into another chunk and breaks it in half. A media-friendly astronomer, Doc Dubois, calculates that this rate of collision will increase exponentially. More and more chunks causing more and more collisions causing more and more chunks. In two years’ time, a huge storm of moon debris will rain down as meteorites on the Earth. Dubois christens this the “Hard Rain”, and it is even worse than the one Bob Dylan foresaw. All life on the planet will be extinguished. And then the Hard Rain will continue for millennia. 
 This is obviously quite bad news. Luckily, however, we have people in space: a plan is hatched to send up more people and equipment toenlarge the International Space Station and turn it into an ark, where a tiny proportion of humanity can continue to live. This is all established in the novel’s early pages, so the suspense of the story lies in exactly how the plan will be accomplished by the deadline, and who will survive. It involves a lot of politicking on Earth, and a lot of clever manoeuvring of robots, comet cores and the like up in orbit. There is an enjoyable strain of nerdy distrust of officialdom, and we learn much about ballistic coefficients and orbital mechanics. There are amusing asides about how living in the End Times is affecting global culture: “The home improvement market had gone bust.” 
 Stephenson populates his space station with a lovable cast of determined, snappily talking geeks, the coolest of whom are women: Ivy, the unflappable station chief; Dinah, the robot expert; and Tekla, the sarcastic Russian cosmonaut. When Ivy is replaced by one Markus Leuker, the novel explains sardonically: “The choice was explained in terms of Markus’s dynamic leadership style, his charisma, and other such buzzwords that, as everyone understood, boiled down to the fact that he was a man.” 
 The Hard Rain’s arrival, perhaps surprisingly, does not offer much disaster-porn catharsis. Instead, seven billion people die very quickly offstage, and the narrative voice adopts the practical mindset of those still alive: forget the Earth, which is now on fire, and focus on how to get the cobbled-together space ark to a safe place and make sure that the last 200-odd members of the human race can not only survive but make babies who can survive. 
 It is touch and go, but I’m not spoiling much (not nearly as much as the blurb) by revealing that, after some fine episodes of space politics and space horror, they eventually manage it, if in radically reduced numbers. Destroying every last human, after all, would make for a massive downer of a novel. Instead the downer is what comes next. A breakneck 565-page tech-action-disaster story of tremendous force and focus is followed by what amounts to a 300-page epilogue, set 5,000 years later, that is built on the idea that character traits can be genetically engineered. (It is odd to find so scientifically dubious an assumption in a novel by hacker bard Neal Stephenson, author of esteemed works of cyberpunk and alt‑history SF.) This last part cannot match the global-emergency propulsion of what went before. 
 In a book (or books) so enormous, it is interesting to see what Stephenson lavishes his attention on and what he seems to be in a hurry about. Some events between characters are presented only in a rushed precis. Near the beginning, it is reported that Doc Dubois has fallen in love with a schoolteacher, but we don’t witness it happen. A spacewalker is cast irretrievably adrift and someone on the space station talks to him over the radio until he dies, but Stephenson doesn’t gives us the conversation. Another character’s boyfriend perishes in an act of sacrificial space piloting that helps to assure everyone’s long-term survival, but she seems fine about it a couple of days later. 
 None of this makes Seveneves the kind of hard SF in which you see a writer dutifully populating his universe with characters who have feelings even though you can tell he just wants to write about giant space gadgets. Stephenson’s people are vivid and terrified: they bicker and cry and perform heroic deeds. But still, he does give himself all the time in the world to describe giant space gadgets. Particularly once we arrive in the novel’s snail-paced last third, there are lots and lots of lavish descriptions of imaginary machines: city-sized orbiting habitats, giant pendulums reaching down into the Earth’s atmosphere, “sky trains”. After scores of pages of this, my eyelids were succumbing to a powerful gravitational force. And I quite like giant space gadgets. 
 