As a young scholar, Umberto Eco trained himself to complete everyday and academic tasks at speed; he quickened his pace between appointments, devoured pages at a glance, treated each tiny interstice of the working day as a chance to judge, reflect or compose. One imagines even his beard was a timesaving outgrowth of impatient ambition. Such deliberate habits in a writer suggest a sort of performance, and Eco has enjoyed showing interviewers around the three studies where he works: one each devoted to reading, typing and writing by hand. Such is his finicky pleasure in his own process that belated Anglophone readers should not be surprised that Eco once published a guide to researching and writing a dissertation. How to Write a Thesis has been in print in Italy, almost unchanged, since 1977. Translated by Caterina Mongiat Farina and Geoff Farina, it is at once an eminently wise and useful manual, and a museum of dying or obsolete skills. Not to mention ancient office products. 
 How to Write a Thesis appeared when Eco was already established as semiotician, pop-culture analyst and author of books about the aesthetics of Thomas Aquinas and the medievalism of James Joyce. Three years later The Name of the Rose turned the public intellectual into a purveyor of ingenious if turgid fiction. Eco’s first novel and his student-writing guide have this in common: they imagine a hasty unlearned youth being led around the library by a middle-aged scholar-sleuth who may himself be on the wrong track. Eco sets out to instruct a student on the edge of panic, and he is more than a little sarcastic about how the tyro scholar may have arrived at this state of emergency: “Let us try to imagine the extreme situation of a working Italian student who has attended the university very little during his first three years of study.” 
 Many readers may recognise themselves – and teachers their students – in the harried slacker to whom How to Write a Thesis offers practical advice. Eco was writing in the context of an old and anomalous academic culture, faced in the 1970s with conflicting bureaucratic demands and potentially crippling (for students, for knowledge) economic circumstances. The laurea was then the terminal degree – how that phrase haunts the young researcher – at Italian universities, and involved a thesis which took the student several months, at worst years, of extra labour. Many candidates had written little or nothing as undergraduates, so balked at extended prose composition, let alone the rigours of a dissertation. Some simply could not afford the time, books or travel required to complete an ambitious piece of research. Others, distracted by the student militancy of the decade, found out too late that the radical’s skills of debate, polemic or protest were not exactly those required for dogged scholarship, or by a state system. To all these students, Eco’s little book offered some hope. 
 One of the admirable impulses behind How to Write a Thesis is this sense that Eco fully understands the many reasons for academic failure: from student poverty, through institutional obtuseness to the crushing “thesis neurosis” that afflicts the type – mea maxima culpa, as it happens – who “uses his thesis as an alibi to avoid other challenges in his life”. Eco is a generous and genial teacher, but he demands some strict choices at the outset. The student must commit to six months at least of sustained work, must give up the egotism that lights on madly ambitious thesis topics and arrogantly “creative” methods, and must practise instead a form of “academic humility”. Any subject, no matter how modest, may yield real knowledge; any writer (Eco is mostly discussing humanities research), however unfashionable or obscure, could turn out to hold the key. Much of How to Write a Thesis is consequently concerned with lowering expectations and limiting the amount of material the student will have to wrangle: “It is better to build a serious trading card collection from 1960 to the present day than to create a cursory art collection.” 
 That might sound a less than enthralling invitation to the vaulting Borgesian precincts of research and writing. But Eco is working on the principle, which almost every writer must learn, that the best intellectual fun is to be had getting lost with a map in your pocket. In 1977 that map was made of paper, and the editors of this new English edition have not disguised the complex analogue methods Eco recommends for marshalling notes and bibliographic entries. (This does happen to venerable writing manuals, with awkward results: I’ve seen an incompletely updated edition of Strunk and White’s The Elements of Style, from the 1990s, that has the novice writer moving oddly between typewriter and computer.) At the heart of Eco’s process is the humble index card, on which the student is enjoined to record all the details of books and articles read, but also quotations, summaries and even initial forays into writing proper. Multiple stacks of index cards – Eco imagines the student hefting them around between libraries – form the substrate on which thought and composition are built. In what is surely a vastly optimistic aside, Eco remarks: “You will have an organised system to hand to someone who is working on a similar topic.” 
 Who knows how effective such advice can ever really be. As I write this, I can still put my hand to a pack of large white index cards I bought 20 years ago, in a fit of nearly fatal PhD anxiety, and never once used. Although the texture of the lost world Eco captures is almost moving now – the scribbled cards, the photocopies, the endless retyping of drafts – it is the state of mind he prescribes that matters, not the moraine of vintage technology that supports it. “The pattern of the thing precedes the thing,” Nabokov said about his own Bristol index cards and Blackwing pencils. You could subtract the last two words from the title of Eco’s book, because at its best it’s a primer in the architectural pleasures of any writing that aspires “to build an object that in principle will serve others”. If Eco is a less inspiring guide to the shape and finish of actual sentences – there are huffy passages about scholars who aspire to prose experiment – that is to be expected in a critic whose style is forever outshone by the likes of Barthes and Calvino. But all three are in love with plans and schemes, which are half of writing, and How to Write a Thesis is a schemer’s dream. 
 
