Ali Eskandarian’s posthumous novel makes perfect reading for sober January days. It tells the story of a young Iranian-American musician on the make in 21st-century New York, pursuing his dream of art through a haze of drugs, alcohol, casual sex and intermittent poverty. The book would be gripping and poignant in any circumstances, but what doubles its power for the reader is knowing the fate of Eskandarian himself. In November 2013, the author was shot and killed in an apartment in Brooklyn, along with two members of the punk band Yellow Dogs, by a fellow musician who bore a grudge. The killer then took his own life. All four men were exiles from Iran. 
 At the time he died, Eskandarian was in his mid 30s. He’d been clinging on to the lower rungs of the ladder of the US music industry for more than a decade. Golden Years is the manuscript he was working on in the last years of his life. It’s a beat novel, which demands to be compared with Jack Kerouac ’s On the Road, as well as Hunter S Thompson ’s Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas and Jay McInerney ’s Bright Lights, Big City. But while the book is billed as fiction, its protagonist, Ali, can barely be separated from Eskandarian by the width of a guitar string. 
 In a series of chatty and frank vignettes, the novel tells the story of Ali’s childhood in Iran, his emigration to America and subsequent career in an industry in which “career” is generally a shape imposed in restrospect on a succession of crises. Between shoestring tours, we find our hero waiting tables, working cash-in-hand in New York’s garment district and taking orders in a Dallas pancake restaurant. 
 As a struggling musician, Ali occupies a strange bohemian wormhole in which he’s taking cocaine with a billionaire in one paragraph and too broke to eat the next. Erudite, rootless, sensitive, smarting from the indignities of poverty and being an also-ran in a society that worships success, Ali clings to his faith that the pursuit of art is its own justification. There’s something both touching and naive about his refusal to compromise. The willed blindness to convention that it takes for him to stay on his tightrope makes him sometimes resemble a more talented version of Jeremy, the Robert Webb character in Peep Show. While doing a lowly job at an ad agency to pay the rent, he fails to get a raise out of his boss and muses: “He must still be pissed off about that email I sent out condemning our company for doing that commercial for a giant agricultural biotechnology corporation.” Ali’s declaration that he is “done with cocaine” is not the dawn of sobriety but a protest at the drug’s debased quality. Cocaine is just “baking soda and baby powder. So for now it’s amphetamines in pill form, alprazolam, marijuana and booze. No more tramadol either since I set my hair on fire on a lit candle.” 
 The constants in Ali’s life are sex and drugs. About rock’n’roll he’s oddly reticent – it’s a shame that he writes so little about performing and his relationship with music as videos of Eskandarian reveal a man of palpable charisma and undoubted talent. I can only suppose that by the time he began writing the novel, he was so disenchanted with the music industry that he couldn’t bear to dwell on it. But much that seems inexplicable from the book – his attractiveness to women, his simmering sense of indignation, his compulsioun to sustain his self-esteem with drugs and sexual conquests – is immediately understandable when you see him playing his heart out to a noisy and distracted audience. 
 His experiences recall those of another cold and penniless musician: the title character of the Coen brothers ’ film Inside Llewyn Davis, who misses out on being the next Bob Dylan for reasons that have more to do with the inscrutable rhythms of the universe than his difficult personality or any shortage of talent. 
 As so often with posthumous work, there is a strange sense of foreshadowing throughout. Ali seems aware that the sand is running out of the hourglass. He recognises that he’s the oldest man on the dance floor and is belatedly acquiring insight into his own predicament: “All my problems and roamings and ramblings can be boiled down to addiction and financial trouble.” There’s a tender and avuncular note in his relationship with the younger Iranian musicians for whom he testifies and interprets at their asylum hearings. 
 The book closes with Ali redoubling his commitment to the life he has chosen, despite the unravelling of another relationship, and no relief in sight to his financial problems. Ahead seems to lie a fork in the road: one path leading towards the fading dream of artistic recognition, the other to the compromises of respectability. Actually, what awaits is stranger and more sudden. From our vantage point, Ali’s fascination with reincarnation and his cosmic musings acquire an eerie heft, and his stubborn fidelity to his art is granted a bittersweet vindication. 
 