‘Poets grow older; verse turns from passion into habit: but only the first condition is inevitable.” When Sean O’Brien penned this statement a decade ago, he surely did so with a quiet commitment not to fall foul of it. 
 Whatever criticisms might be levelled at his oeuvre – a Collected Poems, published in 2012, is a brick-sized tome charting 40 years – a lack of passion isn’t one of them. His early collections are packed with urban pastorals and scenes of social realism, but also have a satirical spikiness, tackling history, class and politics. The hypocrisies of the powers-that-be – Tory governments in particular – come in for some hard-hitting flak. But so, too, do poet and audience, as our potential complicity is smartly scrutinised. 
 For a poet who combines a traditionally metered literary register with punchy demotic, it is apt that O’Brien’s work should have wavered between social commentary and an increasing nostalgia. The Drowned Book (2007), his most lauded volume, was welcomed as a work of visionary imaginativeness. This was true for its disturbing shifts of terrain, and the more pronounced departure from straight realism to nightmarish reverie, serving to blur the two. But it also seemed to escape O’Brien’s well-established longing for a mid-century Britain, a place forever on the cusp of realising the welfare state. 
 The Beautiful Librarians has its brief moments of the extraordinary and the fantastical. In the opening poem, “Audiology”, a poet’s attunement and sensitivity is undone by waves of modern babble, “logorrhoea / In the dreaded Quiet Coach”; elsewhere, the mythical half-human half‑beast of “The Wendigo” comes to represent an abandoned rail-side wasteland. But even here, we are in a very recognisable world: an infuriating train journey; “the rumour of the shoaling leaves / And cider-bottles, rutted earth and Durex”. No one does social observation quite like O’Brien, and The Beautiful Librarians reminds you of the fact. In the comic and strangely heart-warming “Old Lads at the Ramshill Hotel”, a bunch of “wobbly suitors with grease-grey quiffs” attempt to woo ladies with “ironclad hearts” and “husbands they ignore”. “‘No, Stan, don’t hit him, not yet’”, implores one. 
 Yet it is the book’s title poem that is most representative of the collection. While there is still anger and passion in O’Brien’s work, it is more despairing where it was once defiant, calling time on that vision of an egalitarian Britain where once he might have called for it. “The beautiful librarians are dead”, announces the poet, remembering his youthful self “stood in adoration”, as the “fairly recent graduates” sit “stamping books”. The poem is a paean to these quiet but commanding characters with whom the author has kept faith in his lifelong love of literature – a hymn to the Keatsian “realms of gold” they freely afforded him, “book after book”. But it is also bittersweet, undercut by the present-day closure of public libraries, and the grim knowledge that reading, and writing, may only serve in “passing time that passes anyway”. In the sardonic “Pedagogy”, the library is a place “sheltering the indignant and mad / Among the adult categories, / Poetry, Fiction, History”, which have now become, in the business-speak of capitalism, “intolerable to any sane assessment”. “What can we have been thinking of, we dead”, asks the speaker, “with our fussed-over folders / And mild, unprofitable passions?” The answer is a depressing silence. A sense of history, community and identity, of art’s power and meaning, will not “be permitted to survive”. 
 In the midst of what can sometimes look like a consumer-driven mainstream that’s given up on anything that looks like genuine social reform or imaginative endeavour, it might be tempting to agree with the more bleak assessments in The Beautiful Librarians. But there is a more general trend towards the curmudgeonly in these poems, one not solely reserved for sociopolitical critique. “Oysterity” may scrutinise, with Audenesque comic verve, the prizewinning poet’s sense of guilt in scoffing seafood in an expensive restaurant, bearing “the glut of privilege” before he “stands with the protesters”. But elsewhere, musings by the author on the disappointments of the literary life can sound like self-indulgent grumbling. “Life of the mind my arse”, scoffs our poet. Lines such as this aim for the comic, like Jim Royle channelling Philip Larkin, but they can fall short. They also recall earlier poems such as “On Not Being Paul Durcan” and “Welcome, Major Poet!”, in which O’Brien punctures the literati’s absurdities with more liveliness and flair. 
 In spite of any world-weariness, The Beautiful Librarians is still the work of a poet to be reckoned with. A long poem of dramatic force, “The Lost of England”, finds its narrator daydreaming on the train, before his imagination’s double launches into a lecture on the continued importance of bearing honest witness, to “reach for what cannot be touched / Or owned, and learn to love the lost of England”. In perhaps O’Brien’s most famous poem, 1987’s “Cousin Coat”, the secret “historical bespoke” is a guardian against political spin. “Be memory, be conscience, be will and rage”, urges the poet, “And keep me cold and honest, cousin coat, / So if I lie, I’ll know you’re at my throat”. If The Beautiful Librarians can sometimes read a little tired, at its best it shows a writer who has honoured that imperative, tackling themes that deserve attention now more than ever. 
 