Serial abuse of philosophical jargon is central to Ayn Rand’s oeuvre. So let’s call it a gesture of minor respect to say that it is “ontologically” impossible to read any book of hers without engaging with the woman herself. 
 She clearly wanted it that way, given that expressing her own philosophy was her main reason for writing fiction at all. There is no great mystery to art in Rand: like concrete buildings, her books are schematically composed. They are structured as arguments, not stories. You are meant to know exactly what they are standing for. 
 Rand never sought to hide this approach to writing, and even bragged about it. She was a person for whom purity of thought was, to say the least, a fetish, and this extended to her creative process. She had this whole art thing diagrammed and plotted. 
 “I can give the reason for every word and every punctuation mark in Atlas Shrugged,” she once said in a lecture on how to write fiction, “and there are 645,000 words in it by the printer’s count.” 
 Ideal, the “new” Ayn Rand novella reprinted this week by the New American Library, contains considerably fewer words and thus, one might deduce, fewer “reasons” than Atlas Shrugged. Maybe that’s why Rand never published it as a book, shoehorning the story into a play instead. 
 No one pretends that this is anything other than juvenilia: Rand wrote it in her early twenties. Yet Leonard Peikoff, Rand’s heir, gives it the gloss of deeper thought by adding a ponderous introduction on the “epistemological difference between the two literary forms”. He then natters on a great deal about “concepts” and “percepts”. All he means is that the thing works better with visuals. 
 Perhaps, but in this edition, the play script is included along with the novella. And I can’t say it seemed much more like art than its prose twin. 
 There is no effort at anything so mystical as “transporting the reader” going on here. Ideal marches along like a soldier high-stepping on a gravel road. The heroine, if the book can be said to have one, is a ravishing actress named Kay Gonda. She, we learn in the opening pages, is on the run from a murder rap. We follow her as she hides out with six men, a nice, tidy, symmetrical number. Each of these men has been chosen because he has written a gushing fan letter to Kay, and each wears the straitjacket of stereotype. We have a downtrodden businessman, a cornpone farmer type, a sinking hedonist, a tortured artist, etc. 
 When Kay appears in their lives, these men are mesmerized. She takes advantage of their daze to make speeches to them of the following type: 
 Then she vanishes into the night again. 
 In case you’ve missed it, the point is that Kay represents an ideal to these men. There is no real content to her “ideal”, though, other than her physical beauty. The only marginally clever device is that each chapter is preceded by the fan letter in which the particular “ideal” Kay represents is revealed. But really the men are always just wagging on about what she looks like. 
 That doesn’t lend itself to much dramatic conflict. (Even the book’s resolution of Gonda’s fugitive status dribbles off.) Instead, most of the text is expended on the subject of Kay’s attractiveness. Those passages provide good opportunity for the sort of hilarious descriptions that have long provided fodder for close-readers of Randian prose. Kay is blessed, for example, with “a large mouth that looked like the mouth of an idol of an animal that had been sacred”. Sorry, what? 
 Plausible imagery is not Rand’s strong suit. A man is said to have “a face pink and stern as frozen strawberry custard” – as though one can palpably feel disapproval emanating from frozen desserts. Other passages are hopelessly purple. Someone with the last name Peemoller “looked like the last word of a great civilization, hard, clean, wise, concerned with nothing but the subtlest and deepest problems of life”. A female preacher, “small and plump in a Grecian tunic of silver gauze, her white, round arms bare and loaded with calla lilies, talked for many hours, swaying, closing her eyes, moaning softly, chanting hoarsely, screaming triumphantly, her round cheeks stretched into a radiant smile”. 
 By the time you get to the end you are longing for just one moment of indirectness, of subtlety. But then, Rand didn’t really believe in that. 
 “This is the comedy, the tragedy, and the power of Rand,” the critic Sam Anderson once wrote. “She built a glorious imaginary empire on that nuclear-grade temperament, then devoted every ounce of her will and intelligence to proving it was all pure reason.” 
 And yet, like Ideal, it didn’t quite work out for her. 
 