Markus Gabriel’s world is bigger than the universe, and includes not just humans but elves, fairies, Prime Minister Ed Miliband and unicorns on the far side of the moon – everything that exists, even if only in the imagination. 
 How can the universe be smaller than the world? Because the universe, as Gabriel defines it, is only one ontological province among others; a field of sense in which one can speak of distant nebulae and subatomic particles, but not unicorns. But there are other fields of sense too, in which we can speak of unicorns – imaginary objects have their own object domains. 
 The universe as understood by Gabriel, then, is not only a thing out there but also a kind of perspective, the perspective of science. By contrast, the world contains all ontological perspectives and, given that there are in principle an infinite number of such perspectives, that means it is pretty big. And the world is nonexistent because we can never have a perspective on it from the outside. As the great philosopher and Gabriel’s former teacher Thomas Nagel put it, there is no view from nowhere. 
 Gabriel’s main target is the arrogance of science. He wants to attack the suggestion that only by means of scientific method will we someday be able to comprehend the whole of reality. Instead, he argues, “we only ever know sections of the infinite. An overview of the whole is impossible”. The hubristic Hawking-Dawkins scientific intellectual complex is in the German professor’s crosshairs. Hawking gets rapped over the knuckles for that witless passage in A Brief History of Time in which he claims that scientists have replaced philosophers as torchbearers in the quest for knowledge. Gabriel charges him with reducing everything in a potentially infinite number of object domains to one, namely physics. “Had he known anything about philosophy and its history,” writes Gabriel of Hawking, “he would have noticed that for a considerable time philosophers have argued that precisely the questions he himself raises cannot be answered by finding out more about the universe.” 
 As for Dawkins, his graceless and deluded attack on religion in The God Delusion prompts Gabriel to write a fine chapter on the meaning of religion. “There is no such thing as secular society,” he writes, “but only secular subsystems overestimating their intellectual influence on the rest of humanity because they believe they have finally found the right kind of picture: the scientific world picture.” 
 However that is where science, as Bertie Wooster would say, makes its bloomer. “It confuses existence with the domain of what is accessible via the senses and projects the human need for meaning on to the vastness of the galaxies.” But the need for meaning is not to be found in that vastness. Finding the meaning of life involves giving up the “search for an all-encompassing structure”. Gabriel’s (admittedly vague) answer to the question of the meaning of life “lies in life itself … Or to put it in a nutshell, the meaning of life is the engagement with infinite sense, in which we are fortunately able to participate.” 
 But hold on. There aren’t really unicorns on the far side of the moon, are there? Of course not. The very idea is ridiculous. However, in saying that, I am assuming the ontological perspective of science, not the ontological perspective of, say, the fantasy literature aficionado. To take another example, consider witches. They don’t exist in the realm of scientific explanation but they do exist in Goethe’s Faust. Doesn’t this mean that we end up with what Gabriel calls “an unpleasant contradiction”, namely “witches exist and witches do not exist”? He’s sanguine about that affront to logic. “Existence,” he argues, “is always relative to one of more fields of sense.” This sort of suggestion is scandalous not just to scientific orthodoxy but to materialists, who hold that everything in the universe has a material foundation. In Gabriel’s more generous philosophy, everything exists – everything that is, apart from the world. 
 If you think this sounds terribly postmodern then you’re wrong. Gabriel’s “new realism” is, he claims, post-postmodern. Immanuel Kant claimed that we could not know the world as it is in itself, only glimpse it as it were through tinted glasses. For postmodernists there are no facts in themselves; rather we construct all facts though our discourses and scientific methods. There is no such thing as objective reality, only an array of “tinted glasses” or perspectives. Science, politics, social conventions are all just human projections behind which there is nothing. As Gabriel chillingly puts it, this vision is one of “a long French art-house film, in which all participants strive to seduce one another, to gain power over others, and to manipulate them”. 
 No wonder Gabriel wants to break out of the hell of postmodernity, as he describes it. But with “new realism”, he wants to have it both ways: he argues that there are really facts in themselves, that they are not illusory; but also that there is a multiplicity of discourses, each of which has an object domain. Appealingly, though, Gabriel, who trained in Germany and in the US, offers a bridge between German and Anglo-American philosophy (Hegel, Heidegger and Habermas figure in his work as much as Putnam, Dummett and Kripke). This delightful book, translated by Gregory Moss, upholds Wittgenstein’s remark that “whatever can be said at all can be said clearly”. At best, it fulfils Wittgenstein’s aim for philosophy, namely to show the fly the way out of the fly bottle. At worst, it may just show the way from one bottle to another, but at least we can enjoy the flight. 
 
