It is not easy to imagine an account of a life more observant and precisely detailed than James Rebanks’s diary of his years as a sheep farmer in the north-eastern fells of the Lake District massif, in the Eden valley over the ridge from Ullswater. “Diary” is not quite the word. The book seems to have started life as a series of blogs, and it does not narrate chronologically from cradle to middle life; yet a keen sense of being a grandson and son, a father and a husband, does emerge from the series of short sections about daily work and friendships. Nor does it narrate systematically from, say, spring to Christmas; yet Rebanks shows his keen sense of the changes, from growth to withering, lambing to maturing, and his book becomes a wonderfully detailed and candid account of a life that is both individual and typical of this role in rural society. 
 The author is always in the midst of the physical. He falls over in the mud and snow as he looks after sheep struggling through a gruelling winter. He bids for animals at auction, exchanging little signs of encouragement or dissuasion with his father in the spectators’ seats. He brings his grandfather’s beloved sheepdog Ben to the bedside, after the older man has had a stroke. All this is told with perfect pitch, in prose that flows as easily as speech, cleaves hungrily to the particular, and shifts without strain between the workaday and the imaginative. When he and his neighbours are “cleaning out” some craggy terrain – gathering ewes and yearling lambs off the fells to be sheared and separating them into their owners’ herds – they have to chase the sheep down a narrow alley into the different pens: “if you’re lucky, you get three seconds to identify the sheep’s flock mark and open the gate the right way.” So far, so practical. The section ends like this: “The men drive the sheep away home. They fleet away like the shadows of clouds blown across the lower slopes of the mountains.” Such glimpses are recurrent, as the writer lifts his eyes from his tough and engrossing work and delights in the world he inhabits. 
 It is the work that dominates: gathering and herding, clipping, dosing with antibiotics, feeding, castrating, burning carcasses after the culling decreed during the foot-and-mouth epidemic. And the work is intertwined closely with the characters and relationships of the farming families. One unforgettable farm-work sequence tells of how his middle daughter, Bea, badly wants to deliver a lamb because her elder sister is boasting about the delivery she had managed two days before. A ewe in the lambing fields is “lying against a wall … paining on its side”. Bea grabs a lamb toe in each fist and pulls … The lamb slowly peels out of the pink cervix.” Bea “laughs because the ewe licks her bloody hands as she sets the lamb down” and it “wriggles and shakes itself free of the afterbirth slime”. 
 A few pages later, Rebanks generalises about blood in our lives – the necessity of it, the reality of it – and he can do this because he has shown us exactly what it takes to look after animals, to feed, shear, medicate and slaughter them. Or have them slaughtered: a graphic section describes a visit to the knacker’s yard, which was deep in piles of bloated cows and sheep, “puddles of drying blood and bile, pools of piss … like some vast panorama of animal death by Damien Hirst ”. 
 A surprising strand in the book – surprising if you’re inclined to stereotype “working men” or “sheep farmers” – emerges when the writer goes to study at Oxford. When he was younger, he excelled in pub quizzes and had become a book-lover after chancing on WH Hudson’s A Shepherd’s Life. He wrote a history essay for his elder sister, typing with one finger on a word processor – and it was highly praised by her teacher. Aged 21, he enrolled at the nearest adult learning centre, with no GCSEs, and found study so easy that a tutor advised him to go to university. First he had to teach himself cursive writing from children’s manuals. 
 Also remarkable is that he has a second job advising the Unesco World Centre in Paris on how to help communities to benefit from tourism. Such work is a necessity for Rebanks because hill farming no longer pays him enough to live on. No doubt, with his intelligence and capacity for hard work, he gives the secondary job his all. What is striking is that it makes so little showing in the book – presumably, in part, because farming is much easier to describe than studying. He does say that once he had become a student, people “wanted to talk about current affairs when I met them on the lane”. 
 After detailing his jobs – laying hedges, hanging gates, bathing sheeps’ feet and trimming muck from their tails, cleaning roof gutters, and so on – he concludes: “Landscapes like ours are the sum total and culmination of a million little unseen jobs.” Among the survival characteristics that an inspector of Herdwick tups (rams) looks for when he drives from farm to farm around the Lake District are alertness, mobility and strong legs. To these he adds style and character “because sheep are cultural objects, almost like art”. Again and again, without losing his focus, Rebanks reveals the wider context. He shows wit, likening the shearing of ewes’ tails so that rams can mount them more easily to “removing woolly knickers”. He also has a succinct imaginative touch, calling the rougher face of a willing stone “plain and unloved”. Sometimes his broad perspective gives rise to a well-grounded assertion of value, such as when he remarks that his father’s “encyclopaedic knowledge of landscape” makes nonsense of conventional ideas of intelligence. 
 What it all amounts to is the closest possible look into a way of life that most of us only glimpse as we whisk through the countryside or perhaps as we climb and walk there. Such glimpses are unforgettable: a sheep panicking off into midair from a rock ledge in Langdale as I neared it on abseil at the farmer’s request, after it had run out of grass; or the mix of glee and revulsion I saw on some boys’ faces when a farmer castrating lambs in Glen Clova threw a scrotum at them over the fence. Such moments belong to the worked and lived-in land, which Rebanks and his family have maintained and improved for at least six generations, building on the culture of many earlier ones since the ice last retreated from the highlands. 
 