Periodically, signs go up saying that Grub Street is closed to through traffic. Observers speculate that the street is being redeveloped as gentrification forces the former inhabitants to move out, or else that the closure may be due to the expansion of the neighbouring university’s English department. Older heads are shaken in what had been the local pub but is now a coffee’n’crafts shop: there used to be more life in the place, they mourn, when bohemian writers could dash off a review against the clock to pay for their round. Even if Grub Street is eventually reopened, it will never be the same again, and anyway it will probably have been renamed “Creatives Crescent”. 
 Such cliches and exaggerations are characteristic of this genre of lament. Like most keening for the good old days, these threnodies are not pieces of dispassionate historical analysis: they are attempts to compensate for so much that is disagreeable about one’s own time by inventing a more or less idealised version of the past. Still, it is worth wondering why “Grub Street” should be the form taken by paradise lost in this case. After all, the street originally so named in London (it was real before it was metaphorical) came to be the home of that kind of “grub” defined by the OED as “a person of mean abilities; a dull industrious drudge; a literary hack”. Even allowing for self-satire or grunge chic, this doesn’t sound like an obvious career model. Thereafter, that imagined location referred to a way of life in which underpaid, and sometimes undernourished, writers trampled over each other to get a little employment writing uninspired pieces for worthless publications. It was the literary equivalent of the daily scramble at the docks to get taken on for a few hours’ work at starvation wages. Why should any romantic nostalgia be invested in such a dispiriting representation of the literary life? 
 The fact that it is not easy to answer this question may be the most interesting thing about it. To the perennial temptation to prefer the day before yesterday should be added something about the enduring glamour of the idea of the freelance writer; something about anxieties that literary life today has become overbureaucratised, over-academicised and overtaxed; and something about the greater healthiness of openly acknowledging that writing is a form of economic activity. Whatever the sources of this particular kind of nostalgia, it means that discussions of literary life in Britain over the past century are always prone to be sucked into the vortex of this kind of polemic, always likely to be scanned for evidence to support the case for decline. 
 DJ Taylor is far too sophisticated a writer to succumb to such stereotyping. As a self-described denizen of Grub Street himself, albeit actually based at an out-station in Norwich, he displays a good deal of fellow feeling with those in the past who lived by their writing, members of Thackeray’s Corporation of the Goosequill. But he is more concerned to recover and reanimate their literary worlds than to stack up evidence in the service of some present-minded polemic, though a certain lingering regret about what has been lost haunts his account, and he does indulge in a little familiar doom-mongering when he deals with the literary situation today. 
 Taylor’s avowed model is John Gross’s The Rise and Fall of the Man of Letters (1969), which dealt with essayists, critics and reviewers from the early 19th to the mid 20th centuries. One of the great strengths of Gross’s book was that he read the critical writings of his chosen authors, well known and not so well known, for himself and then came to a judgment of his own in a series of shrewd, perceptive literary portraits. Taylor’s book has some of this quality, and among the best things in it are critical snapshots of the leading lights of literary journalism from Sir John Squire and JB Priestley to Alan Ross and James Wood. There are also some fascinating chapters on the economics of the writing life, comparing novelists’ earnings or reviewers’ fees across different eras, plus a couple of rather less successful chapters on “university English”. 
 In form, the book is something of a cross between a series of critical essays and a connected history (Taylor’s practice of reproducing or reworking substantial passages from his own earlier reviews tilts the balance a little towards the former). Its great strength lies in the freshness of his critical responses: this is no textbook survey, but a series of reports by a professional writer who has journeyed to some rarely visited places (the novels of Hugh Walpole, the criticism of DJ Enright) and recorded his impressions. He particularly relishes recovering those figures who have “altogether fallen off the literary map”, such as the once-successful novelist Norman Collins, author of the 1945 hit London Belongs to Me (no, neither had I). 
 In those cases where there is any significant body of scholarship on a topic or period, Taylor largely bypasses it, preferring to comb through biographies and autobiographies for details that throw light on the situation of the writer at various times. He has a good eye for the arresting quotation or anecdote and the text is well stuffed with plums, such as the report on an Arts Council writers’ tour to Humberside in the late 1970s where Shiva Naipaul read some of his work to a class of indifferent adolescents in a local school: “There were no hands raised. In the end someone inquires: ‘Do you live in a mud hut?’” Unfortunately, there is a superstitious belief among commercial publishers that providing proper references or footnotes for cited materials will deter that much mythologised character “the general reader”, but it is not just a scholarly grump to say that the assemblage of “Notes and Further Reading” given at the back of the book sometimes makes it difficult to track down the rich materials that Taylor presents. 
 The Prose Factory does not propose any unilinear story of either progress or decline. Indeed, the richness of the detail makes it hard to be sure whether it has an overall argumentative thread. In so far as it does, it might be that literature in England since 1918 has been a minority pursuit whose fortunes have fluctuated without, at least until the last decade or so, encountering terminal setbacks (he is not oblivious to the distinction between “England” and “Britain”, but he is not too fussed about it, either). “Literature” largely means novels and criticism, the genres Taylor himself practises; there is much less about poetry or drama or most forms of non-fiction prose aside from criticism and reviewing. He keeps a cheerful demotic distance from the peak of Mount Parnassus, and can be a bit snippy about some of its self-satisfied occupants, but he doesn’t stray much beyond its lower slopes. Despite being interested in the journeyman of letters as well as the star reviewer or critically acclaimed novelist, he does not really deal with the most popular forms of writing: the great swampy plain of mass-selling thrillers and romances is not his preferred territory. 
 Taylor is at his best on literary journalism, that intermediate terrain patrolled by intuitive editors, reputation-making critics, needy writers and those celebrities from other walks of life who persuade themselves that they have something readable to say about books. He is, for example, excellent on the early 20th-century taste for the rather whimsical, indulgent “personal” essays (perhaps some contemporary columnists who are thought, at least by themselves, to be amusing writers still tap into a similar taste now). He is right to observe “quite how stylised the essay had become in its early 20th-century incarnation, how prone to feeding off itself, how determined to emphasise its lightness, how keen to exaggerate armature at the expense of brick”. He also notes how the expansion of the press in the interwar years helped make some authors into minor celebrities. This led the publisher Douglas Jerrold to complain that “on Sunday mornings you could hardly hear yourself speak for the noise of popular novelists and biographers calling to each other across the wide open spaces of the Observer and the Sunday Times”. So not much change there, then. 
 In Taylor’s view, literary editors and reviewers started to become even more important from the mid-1950s than they had been in the interwar period, with the dailies, Sundays and weeklies devoting more space to books. The tone of writing to be found in the smart review pages of the 1960s and 1970s he describes as “broadly homogeneous: urbane, tough-minded, debunking, serious, adversarial, eager to bolster its own standards and principles by framing them against the literature of the recent past”. This period was graced by some notably astringent editors such as Karl Miller and Ian Hamilton; the former, ominously for the authors reviewed in the pages of the various journals of which he became literary editor, believed “in the wholesome power of derision”. Hamilton, in particular, acquired cult status for his uncompromising pursuit of a certain kind of quality over the tawdry seductions of popularity. Asked whether he would not like the New Review’s 2,000 subscribers to double in number, Hamilton replied with cultivated steeliness: “Maybe. But I’d like to know who the other 2,000 were.” Equally characteristic of this period was Clive James’s pyrotechnic style of reviewing, “boisterously smartyboots in style and fake-Augustan in its grammar” as Jonathan Raban once described it. Taylor is at home in this milieu, deftly sketching the idiosyncrasies of the major players, responsive to the literary vitality of the good freelance reviewer, quick to puncture pretension, even quicker to take a sideswipe at the dreary denizens of university English departments. 
 After a period of apparent decline in the 1970s, the fortunes of so-called “literary fiction” picked up dramatically in the early 1980s as a cleverly promoted set of “young British novelists” appeared on the scene. These developments highlighted the new salience of the literary agent, artfully contriving bidding wars for typescripts by star authors. Big names became more important than ever: success depended on various forms of publicity that often had nothing to do with the author’s writing itself. The rules that govern the functioning of celebrity culture have increasingly shaped the way that writers, nursed by agents, must “manage” their careers. 
 Perhaps a little more economic and cultural analysis would have been helpful here. For example, the vastly increased importance of literary prizes over reviewing and argued judgment is one of the most obvious ways in which a particular conception of the market has extended its grip in literature as in other areas of life. In the face of much disingenuous publicity, it cannot be said too clearly that book prizes are about selling books. They are artificially contrived “races” which can have only one “winner” because that’s what generates the coverage necessary to increase the profits of the book trade. If we really thought they were serious exercises in discriminating judgement, we would 1) compose the juries of people with some claim to be good at that activity, 2) ask them to publish an argued case for the merits or demerits of the books they have read, and 3) resist the silly idea that one single book is “better” than all the others, most of which may be trying to do quite different things from each other. That, of course, would be derided as a laborious form of reviewing by committee, though it might still be more worthwhile than the current promotional hype. 
 The years from the mid-1980s to the end of the century were also marked by a further expansion in the number of books pages in major newspapers and periodicals, though that trend has recently gone into reverse and there are now dark mutterings about the way criticism is being strangled by the entwining convolvulus of below-the-line misspelled ranting. Overall, the literary scene is both ethnically more diverse within Britain and more international in its scope and relations than it was 50 or 100 years ago. 
 Taylor uses a familiar phrase to describe the changes over the past century, speaking of “a wholesale fragmentation of a reading public”. But perhaps this formula risks exaggerating the unity supposed to have existed in the past: it might be more accurate to say that reading publics, which have always been plural, are now divided along different lines, not just determined by social class or affiliation with traditional centres of institutional power, but more shaped by the faultlines of generation, cultural self-definition and the adoption of new technology. Still, there are continuities if one looks hard enough. Amazon, for example, occupies a place not wholly dissimilar to that of the circulating libraries in the late 19th century, near monopolist providers and hence influential arbiters of taste. Capitalism has continued to shape the profession of letters in its own image: the mechanisms governing the sale of commodities mean a few individuals become very rich indeed and most do not, the whole system being kept going by the illusion that they might. 
 One of the recurring tropes of literary debate across the whole era is the imagined antithesis between “highbrows” and “ordinary readers”. Taylor is firmly on the side of the latter, always on the lookout for any sign of what he calls “snootiness”. He is surprisingly appreciative of the critic Cyril Connolly, who was in many ways the elite’s elitist, but who wins Taylor’s admiration for his willingness to recognise that “a book aimed squarely at conventional mainstream taste may still have merit”. Taylor is correspondingly quick to take down pretension in any form. He quotes Noel Annan saying of Keynes that “it would be wrong to talk about him as if he were an ordinary man”. Taylor admits that one can see what Annan was getting at, but “all this rather ignores the fact that Keynes presumably ate, slept, breathed and defecated like anyone else”. As elsewhere in the book, the earthy, or earth-closety, note here seems slightly over-insistent, as though any hint of pretentiousness or superiority is to be firmly squashed. 
 Similarly, when speaking of the anguished discussion in the early 1940s between those minor Bloomsbury outliers, Ralph and Frances Partridge, about the possible limits to their pacifism, he rebukes Frances for not entertaining “the thought that the ability of well-bred intellectual types to debate the circumstances in which they will or won’t support military conflict largely depends on the possession of a private income”. Even leaving aside the “well-bred intellectual types”, is what this asserts actually true? After all, a great many people debated that question without having a private income, or indeed any income at all. All this suggests that if John Gross could have sired a son by John Carey, critic and author of The Intellectuals and the Masses, the offspring would have borne an uncanny resemblance to DJ Taylor. That’s an impressive pedigree and points to the many strengths of this book, but it does also suggest a horse more suited to some courses than others. 
 He is, for example, on less sure ground in his chapters on “university English”. This is partly because he largely ignores the great body of everyday teaching and scholarship carried on there, preferring to concentrate upon a few well-known names, such as FR Leavis and CS Lewis. His preoccupation with Leavis, in particular, has something strangely obsessive about it. It is, of course, not hard to get up a pretty damning account of the ogre of Downing Castle (Gross’s book also gives this hobby-horse a good canter), but here Leavis seems to function as a metonym for the failings of academia more generally, which is bizarre given how remote from, and hostile to, academic literary scholarship his own criticism was. Presumably, Leavis’s chief sin is to have had the temerity to be critical of the standards and practices characteristic of metropolitan literary life. It’s one thing for insiders to allow themselves the odd murmur about the vacuousness of publicity or the prevalence of back-scratching, but woe betide the outsider, especially the academic, who anatomises these perennial failings. But Taylor still has something shrewd to say even about Leavis, including that much of his critique of popular entertainment proceeded from “a sort of affrontedness”. 
 Beyond this, it is a bit disconcerting to find the discussion of the discipline of Eng Lit at mid century padded out with passages reproduced from his review of a recent biography of Maurice Bowra, an idiosyncratic monster who didn’t actually teach English. And in these chapters his normally sure touch seems to desert him in other ways, too: for example, he buttresses his praise for Malcolm Bradbury’s several services to literature by calling him the champion of a kind of “old-style” liberalism “in a winded and ground-down world, somewhere in that endlessly contested space beyond the end of the Cartesian project and the beginning of the World Wide Web”. Er, well, possibly, but could you just run that by me again? 
 Taylor writes for a living and he is admirably curious about what kinds of living have been made from writing over the past century, being interested, as he neatly says, in cash as well as cachet. He provides a lot of fascinating detail about advances for individual novels, rates of reviewing for individual journals and so on (he can’t resist a jab at “moonlighting academics on institutional salaries”). It would take a different, and more systematic, approach to turn this detail into properly comparative historical data. One familiar difficulty is that, even when prices are uprated in line with the retail price index, this tells us little about the relative costs of different ways of life across the decades. A striking example of this is provided by Taylor’s account of Virginia Woolf’s earnings from reviewing and journalism in 1917. They amounted to just over £95, which is the equivalent of about £4,750 at today’s prices. That is just under a fifth of the current average earnings, a nice supplement if one has other sources of income – but no more than that. However, in 1917 the combined annual wages of the Woolfs’ cook and parlour-maid were only £76 (not counting food and accommodation) or roughly £3,800 at today’s prices. In a society where some 75% of the population belonged to the working class, labour was cheap and the small social stratum that wrote book reviews could live very comfortably on a lot less than a similar standard of living would require now. 
 Again, although Taylor does not propose any larger analytical scheme, one could represent the history of publishing since the late 19th century as involving a series of attempts, through changes in both marketing and technology, to make more books available more cheaply. This began in the 1890s with the replacement of the expensive three-volume format for novels, aimed at the circulating libraries, with the much cheaper one‑volume edition. Then the Edwardian period saw a huge growth in cheap reprint series: World’s Classics began in 1901, Everyman in 1906, and by the end of the decade there were over 80 series of cheap reprints on the market. Penguins were launched in the mid-1930s, turning out large print-runs of low-priced, cheaply produced books, and other houses soon began to imitate them, Corgi and Pan supplying the more popular end of the market. The end of the Net Book Agreement in the mid 1990s allowed supermarkets and other non-traditional outlets to sell popular titles at silly markdowns (although the Net Book Agreement may have looked like a device by which a gentlemanly cartel of publishers kept their profits up, it actually helped sustain a healthier bookselling world than that which has succeeded it). And so on down to ebooks and the internet – indeed to free books, since it is coming to be seen as somehow indecently proprietorial to charge for any product that exists in electronic form. 
 So, are we now at the end of the Gutenberg era? Are books like, say, gramophones, relics of an earlier technological stage of development? Is publishing becoming a “busted” industry, in the way that, perhaps, mining and tobacco might be by the late 21st century, so that the smart money would be well advised to pull out now? Or may the difference between reading a book in paperback and reading it on an e-reader actually turn out to be no more (or less) significant than the change in the mid 20th century between reading a book in hardback and reading it in the new-fangled pocket-sized paperback? 
 Taylor doesn’t directly address such questions, which are in part matters of political economy. Instead, he casts his concluding chapter in the mould of Connolly’s taxonomy of the “enemies of promise”, those forces that prevent writers from realising their talents, such as the distractions of endless reviewing or all those demands of domesticity that Connolly immortally summed up as “the pram in the hall”. Taylor’s discussion becomes surprisingly apocalyptic at this point. He asks whether recent changes have been so fundamental “as to make the long-term observer wonder whether such a thing as old-style literary culture still exists”. 
 He paints a gloomy picture, running together economic changes – the conjunction of the abolition of the Net Book Agreement with the rise of Amazon has been a disaster for independent bookshops as well as damaging to middle-range book publishing – to the putative effects of technological change, leaving us with “a literary culture increasingly governed by a computer screen, where distraction arrives at half-minute intervals and sustained engagement with a text is more or less impossible to accomplish”. This kind of hyperbole tends to be the reflection of a writer’s age and generation rather than clear-eyed assessment, a danger that haunts most exercises in cultural pessimism. 
 Rather oddly, Taylor thinks the two greatest changes since Connolly’s time are “the rise of creative writing MAs and the employment by university English departments of novelists and poets to teach them”, leading to his jarringly exaggerated statement that the rise of such courses is “far more of a threat to the survival of any kind of literary culture than cyberspace or online collaboration”. Really? His sweeping conclusion is that most of the conditions that attend the writing life these days count as “enemies of promise”. So even Taylor eventually emerges as one of the prophets of doom: the end of literary culture is nigh, the writing of serious books may well not survive. 
 However, there seems something mildly paradoxical in intoning this elegy in the conclusion to a serious, well-written 450-page work of non-fiction published by a major publishing house. The sheer vitality of Taylor’s engagement with books, and not always the most fashionable or long-lived books, is infectious. As we read his perceptive portraits and crisp judgments we can’t help feeling that such writing meets a need that is not going to go away anytime soon. I suspect that those “ordinary readers” whom he champions will relish this book for its vivid practitioner’s eye view of the comings and goings in Grub Street over the past century, but, holding this weighty, well-produced book on their laps, will surely exercise their habitual scepticism towards the latest prediction that it is about to be closed for good. 
 