The Last Act of Love is a memoir, and a rather devastating one. It tells the story of Cathy Rentzenbrink and her family coming to terms with a horrific accident involving her younger brother Matty and its heartbreaking aftermath. It may look, on the surface, like a misery memoir as there is certainly some misery here, but that term doesn’t come close to doing it justice. It never, at any time, feels exploitative. The opposite, in fact. And the misery is offset by warmth and gentle humour. 
 The early chapters are great at capturing vivid teenage moments. In one, Cathy and Matty spend a long, lazy afternoon in the garage at the back of the family pub. They end up getting on to the subject of love while Matty messes about with a broken-down motorbike. Cathy believes in love, Matty says it is an illusion, “a trick to make people procreate and look after their young”, but we sense he is bluffing, as teenage boys do. Then he admits: “I suppose if I love anyone I love you.” 
 The mutual sibling affection is so authentic that when the tragedy comes 17 pages in, it punches us in the gut. And then keeps going. We actively feel the family’s transition from normality to living nightmare. 
 First, there is the accident. The rising drama of the night itself is described with breathtaking tension. A pub customer wakes Cathy to tell her that her brother is in trouble – “A worrying word, but a small one.” The concern quickly grows. Matty, two weeks before his GCSE results, has been knocked down by a car. Cathy goes and sees the body in the road, hears the details. Gets blood on her. She thinks of Lady Macbeth unable to rinse the phantom stain from her hands and vows, “if Matty dies… I’ll never wash my hands again.” 
 We slowly realise why, in praying for her beloved brother to live, she “was praying for the wrong thing”. For the book is more about the aftermath of the accident than the event itself. It is about the years following the days in intensive care, when Matty was in a persistent vegetative state (“ ‘vegetative’ was the key word, but a horrible word”). They can’t help but see him as something else – “Matty Two” – though “it felt disloyal to the Matty that was left to grieve for the Matty who was lost”. 
 It is, understandably, a book full of pain. The agonising false hopes, the long days, the weight of a love that can’t actually help anything, the continual guessing at the inner life of someone who can’t communicate. And it is a situation that isn’t about days and weeks, but months and years. Almost a decade. 
 Emotional honesty is essential for memoir writing, and there is a lot of it here. At one point Rentzenbrink gives us a list she wrote at the time of all the things she felt guilty about. It is a long list. And over the years, all these irrational guilts build up. Cathy ends up depressed. The depression she experiences feels like “emotional tinnitus” – something that is always there, even if sometimes in the background. 
 It is also a story about where to fit in. We get the strong sense that Cathy was in awe of her brother, even though he was a little younger, and when she no longer had him, and when she and her parents were stuck inside this seemingly eternal purgatory, we feel her trying to find her place in the world. At school, after moving from Cornwall to Yorkshire, she was seen as posh. At university she discovers she wasn’t that posh after all. 
 She expresses with great skill how hard it was to talk about what was happening. The disconnect between what her family went through and the happy ignorance of the rest of the world is stark. While she is “splintering into bits”, the world, as it is prone to do, rolls on. Developing a deliberate cover, Cathy becomes “cheerful, even boisterous”. While at university she sees a therapist. She realises she can contain her sadness within the 50-minute sessions, slumped on a beanbag, while the rest of the time no one has a clue about what swirls around inside her. 
 She tries out a variety of answers to the inevitable “do you have a sibling?” question. If she tells the truth, no one will know how to cope with her. She lists the pros and cons of each answer. Language is part of the minefield. Later on, an annoying man tells her to “cheer up because it might never happen”. 
 There is a brilliant description of a scene at a pub in York, where all around them people are drunk and jovial, while Cathy and her dad – out of earshot of her mother, whom they don’t want to upset – talk about the biggest and saddest decision they will ever have to make: whether to turn off Matty’s life-support machine. 
 Life is cruel and oblivious, but it can contain much happiness too. And though it seems odd to call a book about loss uplifting, it really is. This is a book you would want to re-read, during a tough time, to make you feel less alone. 
 Yes, this is quite a specific story about an unusual situation, but it also is about life. About family and relationships and work and love and travel and growing up, and how to keep going despite it all. And though the subject is heavy, the style isn’t. It is lucid and warm, and – in detailing Cathy’s path towards a successful, happy, fulfilled, if clouded life – feels strangely nourishing to read. Which you absolutely should. The book itself feels an act of love. 
 
