Everyone loves stories, and stories about the power of stories are particularly appealing to story-lovers and perhaps writers themselves. Or, I should say, “storytellers” themselves. We live in an age in which storytelling is considered the highest possible literary virtue, as though we are nostalgic for some archaic utopia of roaming tale-tellers delighting primitive folk around a fire. As it happens, one of the interlocking stories in Iain Pears’s new novel is set in an archaic utopia where the most powerful figures in society are the Storytellers. The valuing of storytelling above all else does risk the promotion of an infantilised literary taste. If you are all about stories, you might not be so much into Beckett or Coetzee, but you might go mad for fantastical tales in which lots of different things happen. Certainly lots of different things happen in Arcadia. But are Pears’s stories any good? 
 The archaic utopia ruled by Storytellers is called Anterworld, and it is the brainchild of a 1960s Oxford don. Professor Henry Lytten, once a spy in the war, now spends Saturdays in the pub with a few colleagues, who swap pages of their fiction in progress. (It is the group that used, so we are told, to include Tolkien and CS Lewis.) For years Lytten has been making notes about his nice feudal society. Then one day Rosie, the 15-year-old girl who comes round to feed Lytten’s cat, walks through a rusty old pergola in his basement and finds herself in the rural idyll of Anterworld, where she proceeds to have adventures with people dressed in hessian and leather. 
 Meanwhile, in a dystopian future of “scientific government”, a maverick researcher called Angela Meerson has created a device that her boss thinks is a means for exploring parallel universes, but that she is convinced is a time machine. She proves she is right by using it to travel back in time to the 20th century, where she has an affair with Henry Lytten during the war, and later puts a new version of her machine in his basement, disguised as a pergola. She has been using it to run a static simulation of Anterworld. But once Rosie walks into it, the world expands and, for reasons explained with the wave of a hand, threatens to replace current reality. Can it be stopped? And why does the future where Angela is from so closely resemble the fabulously boring techno-fascist fiction of Lytten’s colleague Persimmon? Thus begins a complex time-travelling, world-hopping caper with insistently epic stakes. 
 Nothing in the style in which Pears writes all this down is likely to confuse the average teenager. Indeed, Arcadia seems to be aimed at the lucrative crossover point between the grownup and YA markets, even if it lacks the antic density of the Harry Potter series or the focused peril of The Hunger Games. (There is some carefully orchestrated underage sex, after which one character helpfully tells another that this sort of thing is entirely normal in feudal societies.) The prose is simple, casual and cheerfully anachronistic. Probably only pedants would complain, for example, about a 1960s Oxford don being made to say “Right. That’s you sorted”, or a courtly lady’s chatty uptalking. Cosy cliches – explosions of wrath, half-baked theories – help the whole thing slip down easily. Periodically, one character will helpfully deliver a chunk of catch-up exposition to another. 
 Still, rather like the way in which children’s films incorporate jokes for the grownups, Pears includes some intertextual references to give the more literary-minded reader the pleasure of spotting them. There is much play on Shakespeare’s As You Like It (Rosie, AKA Rosalind, dresses up as a boy named Ganimed, and there is a time-travelling equivalent of Jaques called Jaqui), and obvious echoes of Alice in Wonderland and Narnia; the novel itself is named after Sir Philip Sidney’s 16th-century romance, The Countess of Pembroke’s Arcadia. There is even a walk-on part for someone winkingly suggested to be John le Carr&eacute;, during his time working as a spy. 
 The pages of Arcadia flip by easily, and there is fun in trying to guess exactly how its different worlds are related. Yet the novel overall has a curious feeling of weightlessness: ideas are thrown together without much compelling detail or texture. In the dystopian future, for example, it is casually mentioned that emotions have been made illegal, though how this would work in practice is never really explained beyond references to an enforced drug-taking regime. Bravely, the novel also criticises the cherished fantasy writers whom Lytten used to drink with in the pub. Tolkien is chastised for hedging his bets about the supernatural, while CS Lewis’s Aslan is, according to Lytten, a “bloody bore”, and the Narnia books are dismissed thus: “Lewis tried to invent an entire world, and created only a middle-class English suburb with a few swords.” 
 Pears, by contrast, has tried to invent three entire worlds, plus an app. Arcadia is being simultaneously published as a hardback book and on the iPad and iPhone (it’s not available on Android). On the app’s opening screen the novel’s timeline is presented as a kind of branching subway map. Each line represents the journey of a different character; they twist and intersect at nodes before branching out once more, until all finally meet again at the ending. The chapters, though, are simple black-on-white text, and broken up into chunks a page or two long: if the scene has contained more than one character, then you can choose which you want to follow to the next scene that focuses on them, navigating through the book via different strands of storyline. 
 In addition to what seems to be the entire text of the novel, the app also includes extra material, such as a scene in which one character educates another about political history; there are also extracts from Lytten’s notebooks about the social organisation of Anterworld. Events that take place off stage in the book, such as the moving death of a previously dislikable character, are presented fully in the app. Undoubtedly this material would have improved the novel had it been included there, too. But then, the app would also benefit from more fleshing out in places. When Angela relates how she travelled through time to Germany in 1936, she says casually in the novel: “I will not here describe the experience of landing in a world so foreign to my experience, so brutal and so intoxicating in many ways.” Well, she doesn’t describe it in the app, either. 
 Each colour-coded line on the map is the story of one of 10 characters: we have “The Professor’s Tale” (Lytten), “The Scientist’s Tale” (Angela), “The Young Girl’s Tale” (Rosie), and so on. This works quite well for following the major characters, but not for the minor ones. “The Oligarch’s Tale” comprises merely those scenes from the novel that include a shadowy billionaire boss of the dystopian future named Oldmanter, but he does no more here than in the book, and so his storyline makes little sense on its own. The app, then, doesn’t contain enough extra material for it to work on its own as an interactive reading experience. 
 I would definitely recommend that prospective readers buy the book instead of the app; a printed book is much better than an iPad for reading on the beach (probably the most charitable context in which to consume Arcadia ). Besides, the app, while slickly engineered, explores a terribly old-fashioned concept: the idea of forcing a reader to navigate her own path through the material echoes the mid 20th-century avant-garde experiments in publishing books as unbound stacks of paper. Others may enjoy “reading” in this way, but I found it annoying to be burdened with the labour of having to decide which storyline to follow next. Telling things in the right order, after all, is a crucial part of any Storyteller’s job. Why delegate the task to an amateur? 
 
