If we accept for argument’s sake that Go Set a Watchman, Harper Lee’s premature sequel to To Kill a Mockingbird, has been intentionally published by its author, we are left with only two significant questions, both about value: is it any good, and does it do any good? Mockingbird indisputably did quite a lot of good, and it’s very good at what it sets out to do. There’s a reason Mockingbird is so loved: it is charming, beautifully controlled and heart-warming. The answer to whether Watchman is any good aesthetically is simple: not very. The question of whether it may do any good morally is more complicated, and circles around the outrage so many readers report at discovering Atticus Finch, that beloved imaginary Abraham Lincoln of the civil rights movement, spouting racist bile. 
 The devotion that readers can feel to imaginary characters is a strange and wonderful thing, at the heart of the cognitive mystery that is the reading process. Because it’s internalised, reading closes the gap of detachment we feel watching others enact a story; characters we only imagine entwine with our own thoughts, histories and perceptions. This process is amplified when the story converges with readers’ own sense of personal development. If we have grown up admiring an idealised father figure like Atticus, incorporating him into our value system, then the sense of betrayal at finding him espousing immoral views may be real, and profound. 
 This is the dilemma faced not only by readers of Watchman, but by Jean Louise (Scout) Finch, who returns home during the civil rights movement to find the father she thought despised racism defending segregation. The slender plot of Watchman hangs on this disclosure. Scout must come to terms with the revelation that her father is not Saint Atticus, leaving Watchman ’s readers to struggle with the same problem: we’re all Scout Finch now, shocked at discovering our father figure has feet of Alabama clay. Maybe it is time for us all to grow up. 
 Initially, Watchman seems to offer a more adult perspective than Mockingbird ’s tightly focused child’s eye, indicating that Jean Louise will finish losing her innocence, dragging several million readers unwillingly with her. Although the disclosures about Atticus are repellent, one hopes that adults can withstand an imaginary encounter with nastiness (as well as the imaginary death of another important character). Some readers welcome the prospect of an Atticus who turns out to be human after all, no matter how ugly the humanity on display. And then there are those who insisted all along that deeper scrutiny revealed a few warts even on the Atticus of Mockingbird. Perhaps Watchman will prompt a more complex debate about the role of racism in Mockingbird, where it is often more a plot function than a moral dilemma. Perhaps it might also prompt a more complex debate about what we hope for from fictional characters. 
 Some have argued that objecting to how Atticus “really” turns out in Watchman misunderstands how fiction works. Atticus has no reality off the page, they point out, and it is true that Atticus hasn’t been skulking around for 50 years hoping no one would out him as a racist. But what is meant by this, presumably, is that there is more to Atticus as a fictional character than meets his daughter’s eye in Mockingbird. There he appears to be a proto-champion of civil rights, but in the (fictional) truth revealed in Watchman, he is “really” a racist. (The problem isn’t that such readers don’t understand the fictional enterprise, but that their critics seem not to understand that “really” can be used figuratively.) Discussions of what Atticus is “really” like converge with the fact that Mockingbird is semi-autobiographical: Maycomb is based on Monroeville, Alabama; Dill is modelled on Truman Capote; Lee’s father was an upright southern lawyer; and so on, all of which makes it facile to dismiss anxieties about Atticus’s reality as the folly of naive readers. A more complicated knotting of art and life lies at the heart of Mockingbird ’s story, and of its appeal. Part of the novel’s claim to profundity has always related to the real history of civil rights in the American south, and the fact that this fable about racial justice in Alabama emerged in the wake of the Montgomery (Alabama) bus boycott. The widespread concern over what Atticus is “really” like surely stems in part from this awareness of the character’s entanglement in a very real history of violence and profound injustice, a toxic actuality that all too obviously lingers. The devotion people feel to Atticus is in direct proportion to his claim on goodness, to Lee’s implicit assurance that there were non-racist white people in a white-supremacist society prepared to defend truth and justice, and that these values might still be part of the American way. Readers’ subsequent sense of betrayal is equally proportional to the conviction that Atticus stood for a significant promise, now broken. If even Atticus Finch is a white supremacist, what then? 
 To Kill a Mockingbird is a consoling book, and a childish one. It knows that democracy, justice and courage are good, and that racism, incest and false allegations of rape are bad. Good white people are so good that good black people stand up when they pass out of respect, and this makes no one uncomfortable. Bad white people die or disappear from the story. There are no bad black people at all, because that would undermine Lee’s racial parable. None of this makes very grave moral demands on the reader. But there are many of us who’ve long had our doubts. Some are discomfited by the paternalism good white characters demonstrate toward black ones in Mockingbird, although others counter that this is historically realistic: paternalism was a common attitude in the Jim Crow south. True, but Mockingbird heartily endorses Atticus’s morality, and his values are rather more dubious than the book, or many of its readers, care to admit. Atticus overlooks the racism of characters such as Mrs Dubose, while praising the “courage” she shows in breaking her drug addiction. Lynch mobs are populated by decent folk who can be shamed out of violence by small children; the threats of torture and mutilation that went with lynching are dismissed as a “blind spot”. In Mockingbird, Atticus tells Scout that the Ku Klux Klan was “a political organisation more than anything” that briefly emerged “way back about nineteen-twenty” but “they couldn’t find anybody to scare”. We might wonder whether Calpurnia or Tom Robinson would have agreed. 
 Watchman simply makes all of this more explicit. Atticus gives a long speech towards the novel’s end defending paternalistic racism, explaining that black people are too childish to be given power. This is moral casuistry of the worst kind from someone the novel continues to insist is an uncompromising upholder of the law. “Every man’s island, Jean Louise,” proudly states Watchman ’s back cover, “every man’s watchman, is his conscience.” Atticus bends his conscience to protect his privilege, while Jean Louise, who earlier vomited on the discovery of her father’s racism, now accepts his argument, admitting that although she’s all for equality in theory, she wouldn’t want to marry a black person. After revealing Atticus’s segregationist views, Watchman passes the moral torch from Atticus to his brother, Jack, who is avowedly accommodationist, advising Scout to accept what she cannot change. Uncle Jack also argues, and Scout likewise accepts, that the Klan is perfectly harmless as long as it is merely a bunch of “fools” parading around in sheets. As soon as the Klan stooped to violence, Uncle Jack maintains, Atticus would use the full power of the law to try to stop it. But violence is not the only form intimidation takes, and black people had good reason for not regarding Klan parades as mere “foolishness”. Watchman finally compounds all this ardent paternalism by insinuating that Atticus’s racism, while objectionable, is also a fatherly gift he has given his daughter to help her separate from him. 
 Anyone who wants to understand how cognitive dissonance works should read Watchman: the book is shot through with it. Thus Jean Louise insists that the racial violence of the 1950s was provoked by desegregation. Before the civil rights movement, the good white people of Maycomb were not racist, she is certain. Which leaves her wondering: “What turned ordinary men into screaming dirt at the top of their voices, what made her kind of people harden and say ‘nigger’ when the word had never crossed their lips before?” The answer, of course, is that white supremacism was always there, but could afford to appear covert when its authority was undisputed; only when its power was threatened did it need to reveal itself in all its malevolence. Nor is it a negligible detail that Jean Louise frames this question in terms of “her kind”. “There’s four kinds of folks in the world,” Jem explains in Mockingbird. “There’s the ordinary kind like us and the neighbours, there’s the kind like the Cunninghams out in the woods, the kind like the Ewells down at the dump, and the Negroes.” “Our kind” are people with “background”, which is a euphemism for “breeding”. 
 Atticus gently mocks his sister for insisting on the Finches’ “gentle breeding”, but both books uphold biological determinism. The poor white-trash Ewells in Mockingbird are irredeemable, because their kind are dirty, incestuous and drunken. The Ewells belong at the dump, and the Finches leave them there, including 19-year-old Mayella, who, the book implies, has been raped all her life by her father, before she takes a fancy to poor Tom Robinson, the impoverished black man whom she plots to seduce. Once Mayella has served her plot function, the book forgets all about her, sparing no further pity despite Atticus’s constant injunctions to cultivate empathy. In Watchman, the Robinson trial is just a passing anecdote, with more realistic details: the girl who accuses the black man of rape is 14, and Atticus’s defence is not that the man didn’t consent (as is the case in Mockingbird ) but that the girl did. His defence was successful, in this version: the jury acquitted the black man, perhaps because in reality sexism sometimes trumps racism. There is no mention of incest in the trial: instead, another “white trash” daughter is made pregnant by her father in a different incident, confusing the young Scout about pregnancy. In neither case is there any suggestion that white-trash daughters might object to being raped by their fathers; these girls are nugatory, left to disappear back into their backwoods existence. 
 At issue, ultimately, is a eugenicist conception of identity that continually sabotages the fine moral ambitions of both books. Lee constantly falls back on the idea that people are just “born” a certain way; social environment and education have nothing to do with it. This logic leads Watchman to insist several times that Jean Louise was “born colour-blind”, another instance of pure cognitive dissonance, in which biological determinism is invoked in order to explain the mystery of why someone isn’t a racist. This implicitly exculpates everyone else of “her kind”, who can’t help that they were born racist any more than black people can help being born childish. And it means there was no hypocrisy, no treachery: Atticus did not betray his principles when his power was threatened, but is to be admired for upholding his (racist) ideals. This casuistry enables Jean Louise to make a separate peace with segregationists, while insisting that she rejects segregationism. Meanwhile, a romantic subplot with a childhood friend who supports Atticus’s segregationist schemes is resolved by sheer denial. Hank tells Jean Louise that his racism protects his more precarious social status as a white man without “breeding”, and that her lofty contempt for it is a luxury afforded by her class status. Jean Louise rejects this speech, as if Lee couldn’t consciously accept what she secretly knew to be true: that these categories are not hereditary, but the effects of centuries of inequality and injustice. 
 This is not an anachronistic demand that Lee be ahead of her time. In 1949, Rodgers and Hammerstein wrote a song called “You’ve Got to Be Carefully Taught” for their hit show South Pacific, in which a soldier sings: “You’ve got to be taught to be afraid / Of people whose eyes are oddly made, / And people whose skin is a different shade, / You’ve got to be carefully taught.” (When the show toured the American south, demands were made that the song be cut; Rodgers and Hammerstein flatly refused.) For that matter, Mark Twain imagined Huckleberry Finn rejecting the racism of his society in 1884. Huck lights out for the territory, prepared to go to hell rather than accept the racist tenets of his world. Watchman ends almost a century later with a purely accommodationist image, as Jean Louise learns to stop bumping her head against an unyielding environment. 
 Some may argue that dwelling on identity politics obscures other questions, but both books concern identity politics from start to finish, and neither quite achieves the wisdom it seeks. Mockingbird is technically far more accomplished than Watchman, which is a deeply mediocre novel, stylistically, structurally and intellectually. It turns out that revision and hard work matter: two years of serious effort and the help of a clever editor wrought a profound change. Watchman visibly struggles, and fails, to achieve an adult perspective on its characters. Mockingbird settles for entirely mastering a child’s perspective, an achievement that is complete, but limited. 
 To Kill a Mockingbird has always been viewed as a parable about America. Go Set a Watchman is now forcing us to look more squarely at the racism lurking beneath, and we don’t like what we see. Our horror at discovering that Atticus was really a racist may be genuine, but it is also the rage of Caliban, seeing himself in the mirror. “As sure as time,” Uncle Jack tells Jean Louise in one of the book’s best sentences, “history is repeating itself, and as sure as man is man, history is the last place he’ll look for his lessons.” Watchman is nowhere near as good a novel as Mockingbird, but it might prove an equally significant one, if it helps us look to history for our lessons, rather than to our consoling, childish, whitewashed fables. 
 
