For centuries, London has been known to out-of-towners as the “smoke” or the “big smoke”. The Thames basin, surrounded by low hills, has always been prone to mist. As early as the medieval period this was made worse by domestic fires burning wood and “sea-coal” which was brought by boat from Newcastle. Elizabeth I proclaimed herself to be “greatly grieved and annoyed with the taste and smoke of sea-coales”. In 1661, John Evelyn complained that sea-coal had turned London into “hell upon earth”. Evelyn’s “glorious and antient city” was often shrouded in “clowds of smoake and sulphur, so full of stink and darknesse”. But his far-sighted proposal to move industry outside the city and to create a green belt of aromatic plants and hedges was ignored, and in the coming years, as London expanded to become the largest metropolis the world had ever seen, the city’s fogs grew steadily worse. 
 By the beginning of the 19th century, some fogs lasted a week and were so dense you could not read during the day, even by a window. The fog made people’s eyes smart and caused breathing difficulties. A tombstone in Kensal Green Cemetery commemorates “LR Who died of suffocation in the great fog of London 1814”. By the 1830s, the city’s population was two million and still rising. Not only was every house heated by coal but London was also a major industrial centre, and firms producing everything from beer to chemicals all added to the noxious fumes in the city’s air. 
 Christine Corton dates the emergence of “true London fog, thick, yellow, and all-encompassing” to the 1840s. Conditions steadily deteriorated until the 1880s, when there were on average some 60 fogs a year. After the 1890s the increasing popularity of gas fires and stoves, the introduction of electric motors to replace steam engines, and the gradual relocation of industry to the outer boroughs began to slowly reduce the number of foggy days endured by Londoners. But fogs persisted well into the 20th century. In The Waste Land, TS Eliot wrote of London as the “Unreal City, Under the brown fog of a winter dawn”. By this time there was also a sense that Londoners were rather proud of their ability to cope with these periodic fogs: Corton suggests this was “a foretaste of the ‘Blitz spirit’”. It’s astonishing, though, how long Londoners were forced to suffer. Repeated attempts were made to pass legislation to regulate smoke from industry, but until the 60s all were defeated by those in parliament who supported business interests. 
 One of the most terrible fogs began on 4 December 1952 as a cold front moved across the capital. The air was very still and the smoke from countless fires hung in the cold air. Soon a thick yellow fog smothered the city like a blanket, extending out for 20 miles from the centre of London. It lasted for a week. “I’ll never forget it,” recalled one Londoner, “because the smog was so thick you really felt like you were walking into a war.” A performance of La Traviata at Sadler’s Wells had to be stopped as the audience couldn’t see the stage. Sports events were cancelled, flights grounded, public transport restricted and ambulance workers and fire-fighters had to walk in front of their vehicles. It became known as the “Great Killer Fog” and may have caused as many as 12,000 deaths. 
 Corton’s wonderfully detailed and original exploration of foggy London ranges from the earliest mists to the last great pea-souper of 1962. (She notes that Herman Melville was the first to compare London’s fog to pea soup, in 1849.) Her account is rich in memorable anecdotes and descriptions, gleaned from popular culture, literature, journals and contemporary letters as well as cartoons and art history: the book is also splendidly illustrated. Corton is particularly good on the city’s foggiest years, in the second half of the 19th century. London became the first great metropolis of the industrial age and it was during these years that the poisonous effects of this uncontrolled expansion threatened to make life in the city unbearable. 
 In 1871, French historian Hippolyte Taine described how “a thick, yellow fog fills the air, sinks, crawls on the very ground; at 30 paces a house or a steam-ship look like ink-stains on blotting paper”. After walking around for an hour he admitted “one is possessed by spleen and can understand suicide”. Unsurprisingly, depression was common on foggy days and suicides reached a peak in November. A Portuguese writer believed there was a link between the fog and drunkenness: “everyone drinks heavily and incessantly to combat this freezing, fatal fog”. Arthur Rimbaud was in London in 1872 and complained that the “yellow fog added the constant sound of coughing to the roar of traffic”. Later he would speak despairingly of the “monstrous city” and its “endless night”. 
 Literature provides Corton with a wealth of foggy examples. Charles Dickens was one of the first to exploit the symbolic potential of London’s fog. The opening lines of Bleak House (1853), with its “soft black drizzle” of soot falling like snow from the sky, are unforgettable. Dickens coined the phrase “London ivy” to describe the sooty particles left by fog. “London particular”, another term for fog used in Bleak House, was common as early as the 1790s and also referred to a brown Madeira wine imported for the London market. Dickens transformed the dark fog into a symbol of the end of times, the “death of the sun”. For other novelists, too, the fog became, says Corton, “a metaphor for the sickness of urban society” and inspired apocalyptic visions, such as William Delisle Hay’s The Doom of the Great City (1880), one of many fictions to describe London annihilated by one final, suffocating fog. 
 Not everyone hated London’s fog, however. The writer Nathaniel Hawthorne described it in 1857 as “like a distillation of mud”. But he thought it entirely fitting: “This fog seems an atmosphere proper to huge, grimy London.” Some London artists fled the city to work abroad during the winter months of mist and murk, while foreign artists were drawn to the capital by the unique lighting effects. Claude Monet painted hundreds of canvases of the Thames in the fog. It could be fickle though. Monet wrote: “When I got up, I was terrified to see that there was no fog, not even the least trace of a mist.” But he didn’t have long to wait before the city’s fires and furnaces supplied the desired effect. “What I love more than anything in London is the fog,” he wrote. “Without the fog London wouldn’t be a beautiful city.” 
 
