“It’s annoying not knowing how long we’ve got left, don’t you think?” one woman asks another in Cockfosters, the title story of Helen Simpson ’s sixth collection. Thirty years, they hazard – 40 or 10 or two? Both fiftysomething, they’re riding the Piccadilly line to its terminus, searching for a pair of newly prescribed, already lost bifocals. The clock ticks loudly throughout these pages, as a woman bakes a beloved lemon cake for a grown daughter’s birthday, totting up the number she’s made over the decades, or a lawyer peers nervously ahead not to retirement, but to the years he’ll need to work in order to pay for his second family. 
 Simpson’s characters are as middle-class as they are middle-aged, with book groups and acupuncture appointments offering rare respites from harried schedules. If this makes the material sound tired, fear not: true to form, Simpson brings wit and sharply human touches to her material, balancing an acute if understated sense of mortality with flashes of unbridled joy. There’s mischief, too – with an edge. While an insensitive spouse slumbers on, the narrator of Erewhon falls prey to sleep-stealing anxieties concerning childcare, those stubborn extra pounds, the impersonal demands for marital sex. The twist? The narrator is a man, the soundly sleeping partner his wife. 
 Simpson is that rare writer who has successfully carved a reputation based exclusively on short stories. For Truman Capote, the form was more than mere warm-up: in 1948, aged 24, he won the O Henry award for Shut a Final Door. That one doesn’t feature in The Early Stories of Truman Capote, which instead brings together for the first time 14 tales lately discovered in the archives of the New York Public Library. 
 Dating from his late teens and early 20s, these works – some more slender than others – shine a light on Capote’s search for voice and theme. They conjure up Southern vignettes and Central Park encounters, telling of misfits and outsiders, of crime and compassion, racism and tenderness. Along with cinematic elan they convey a strong flavour of reportage, hinting at what was to come. 
 Shena Mackay left school at 16 and published two novellas before she turned 20. Now in her 70s, she has since written plenty of longer works but the stories she selects for her bumper volume Dancing on the Outskirts prove that she can still dazzle in short form. A venerable editor and her crass young assistant find themselves in Goa on the trail of a reclusive novelist. An unrequited crush on a pupil leads a school teacher to turn his house into a giant aquarium. Fresh hot cross buns unite passengers on the 196 bus, among them a gospel choir, a B-list actor and a headscarfed babushka. 
 Though there is a sepia tinge to many of these stories – think church on Sundays and smoking on public transport – it’s coupled with zingy, Technicolor prose. Just consider what that actor finds himself craving: “a Sunday tea of lettuce in a cut-glass bowl, with canned salmon drowning a greenfly in salty water and beetroot tingeing the tinned vegetable salad with pink; apricots in Carnation milk and the pink and yellow windowpanes of Battenberg cake”. 
 For Rachel Joyce, author of the novel The Unlikely Pilgrimage of Harold Fry, short stories are a place to park outsized walk-on characters culled from her longer fiction and plays. A Snow Garden is set in the runup to Christmas, and over the course of its seven, lightly linked tales, freak weather grounds flights, a single mum watches her younger boyfriend waltz out of her life, and a couple implodes while assembling a bike for their 12-year-old son (who really wants a green dress with a sweetheart neckline). The perfect tonic for tinsel-itis, it’s laced with quietly devastating observations on love and marriage. 
 In A Wild Swan and Other Tales, Michael Cunningham returns to the land of fairy stories, glanced upon in his most recent novel, The Snow Queen. Here, Hansel and Gretel’s witch becomes a lecherous old broad, hoping for young flesh to school; Snow White’s happily-ever-after entails kinky role-play with her prince; and among the oddballs at a bar on the outer edges of a city is a “crownletted frog who can’t seem to truly love any of the women willing to kiss him, and break the spell”. With a light touch and bags of sardonic elegance, Cunningham impishly expands on these timeless narratives. 
 The short story, Stephen King declares in the introduction to his new collection, is “like a waltz with a stranger you will never see again, or a kiss in the dark, or a beautiful curio for sale laid out on a cheap blanket at a street bazaar”. The Bazaar of Bad Dreams is the title it more than lives up to, but just as interesting as the stories themselves are their prefaces, in which he reveals what inspired each one. Who besides King would conjure up a flesh-eating stationwagon from a drive to see his college sweetheart? 
 