Like David Aaronovitch ’s parents, Sam and Lavender, my mother and father, Joe and Molly, were for many years members of the British Communist Party of Great Britain. As the CPGB declined from its high point of wartime popularity and followers gradually turned their backs on the faith, so the idea of the turncoat, the sellout, the apostate came more and more to dominate my parents’ state of mind. 
 Even when I was quite small, we would be out shopping and my mother or father would gesticulate towards some harmless-looking individual and say in a whisper: “See him over there trying on gloves? He left the party over Hungary in 1956 and now he’s... ” Here they would pause before revealing the full horror: “... a Labour councillor!” Or, “Don’t look, but that woman by the bacon counter, she used to be in CND but now she’s … joined the Air Force!” At first I couldn’t see anything different about the people my parents pointed out, but over time it did seem to me there was a certain haunted quality, an air of sadness that hung over them. Their mood probably wasn’t helped by being whispered about in shops, but I sensed that the main critical voice was inside their heads, that they were aware on some level that they had abandoned their younger, more idealistic selves and it had corroded them from the inside. 
 If my mum and dad could somehow be brought back to life and the three of us visited a place where Aaronovitch hangs out – an Islington sports centre, perhaps, where he plays in a five-a-side football team that also includes Chuka Umunna, they would point at him and say: “See that bloke in the unflattering T-shirt, his father was an important party official, SE regional organiser and culture secretary, but now his son is... a columnist on the Times!” 
 The gaffer, the boss, old Karl Marx himself wrote in his essay “The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Napoleon” words to the effect that history repeats itself, first as tragedy, then as farce. For my parents, the collapse of the Soviet Union was a tragedy that brought their entire belief system tumbling down. But the method I adopted to survive both my parents’ political fanaticism and its subsequent very obvious collapse was to go straight to the second stage; I developed an eye for the more farcical side of their politics. From a very early age I assumed an attitude of detached wry amusement to the often insane world my mum and dad inhabited and the frequently mad things that they believed. This in turn has meant that I am able to have a relatively easy relationship with the modern world of the left and remain, to a degree, part of it. 
 Aaronovitch, on the other hand, seems to have taken it all much more seriously. He was an active Young Communist, a president of the National Union of Students on a leftwing ticket and then a campaigning journalist. Ultimately, as detailed in Party Animals, he found himself betrayed both by the collapse of communism and, worse, by his communist parents, who are revealed in this book to be in their own different ways shockingly cruel and dishonest people, particularly to their son. Which perhaps goes some way to explaining Aaronovitch’s arc from left to neoliberal right. 
 Initially I found the book highly enjoyable, though it would have been surprising if I hadn’t, as a lot of the characters who featured in Aaronovitch’s childhood also appeared in mine. Betty Ambatielos (formerly Betty Bartlett), communist wife of imprisoned Greek trade unionist Tony Ambatielos, for example; or Lin Qui, the elegant Vietnamese journalist and spokeswoman for the Viet Cong who sometimes sat in our front room in Anfield looking a bit confused about what she was doing there. But the similarities go deeper: we each have one Jewish parent and one not, and a lot of the events in our lives are almost identical. At one point, the Aaronovitch family fall out with their dentist. This woman is of course “in the party”, just like their builder, their plumber and their accountant, and the disagreement is ideological rather than orthodontic. On moving to a new, politically neutral dental practice, says David, “we discovered that some practitioners actually used a local anaesthetic before they did fillings”. This was exactly my experience, suffering for years at the hands of a dentist who, though incompetent and cruel, maintained the correct line on the dictatorship of the proletariat, which was thought by my parents to be more important. 
 Nonetheless, there is enough here to enjoy for the reader who didn’t share our joint upbringing, especially the tart and erudite sections on the various crises afflicting communism through the 20th century: the Nazi-Soviet pact of 1939 and the British party’s contorted and dishonest reaction to it, Stalin’s purges and show trials, the invasion of Hungary, the invasion of Czechoslovakia and so on. It was only as I read further that I began to experience frustration with the story being told. Time and again, things happen, dark undercurrents are hinted at, but they are left unexplained. At one point, Aaronovitch writes that after his father failed to get appointed to a senior post within the party “he probably lost his temper with us more easily than he had before (his and my relationship at this time was horrible and not without physical violence)”. You think, eh? What? How did you feel about this? Yet no further explanation is offered until the very final chapter. When it comes, it is explosive, but by then you have been through the entire lives of Sam, Lavender and little David, and it is a chore to revisit their actions, even armed with the new and startling information. 
 Why the story is arranged in this way I cannot fathom. Perhaps it is a journalistic impulse to ensure veracity, historical context and authenticity rather than the freer inclinations of a novelist or memoirist, who would almost certainly have put things in chronological order rather than employing this stuttering, backwards and forwards narrative. As I read, I felt a great deal of sympathy for Aaronovitch – his mother, in her madness, was spookily like mine, so I have had to work through a lot of the same stuff. Yet I sensed that, despite years of psychoanalysis, he still possesses a great deal of suppressed and unexpressed rage towards both his parents and the politics to which they dedicated their lives. 
 Party Animals could and should have been (and occasionally is) a moving and disturbing account of a tormented family, a tale of rigid belief and dishonesty that was sometimes domestic and sometimes spanned the globe, but too often it feels simply like a news report of those same events. 
 