Peggy Frew’s critically acclaimed debut novel, House of Sticks was a moving tale of a young woman making the transition to motherhood which won the 2010 Victorian premier’s literary award for an unpublished manuscript. With her new book Hope Farm, Frew inverts the proposition, tackling the minefield of parenting but viewed through the eyes of a 13-year-old girl called Silver. 
 From the distance of adulthood, Silver reflects on the year that changed her life and irrevocably damaged her relationship with her mother Ishtar. It is 1985. Up to this point, theirs has been a a nomadic life, moving between ashrams, communes and group households – until Ishtar falls in love with a man called Miller and they move to Hope Farm. 
 It’s another group household, a crumbling house filled with no-hopers. But life is different here. Silver finds the cold of country Victoria bone chilling after a lifetime in the milder climes of Queensland. Nor does she like the way Miller paws at her mother, or his shifting personality. But she is free to roam with friend and neighbour Ian and the pair spending hours by the creek or exploring the old mine shafts. 
 There’s another more troubled freedom in Silver’s relationship with her mother. Ishtar fell pregnant with Silver at 17 and despite telling her she would have kept her daughter even if abortion had been an option, this never quite rings true. Each page of the book holds the expectation something awful has happened (or will happen) to Silver amid Hope Farm’s drugs, alcohol and orgiastic parties. Free to see adults, especially her mother, behaving badly, means she has visited places a child should not witness. The cost of that freedom: her innocence. 
 In an interview with The Rachel Papers, Frew said: “Once you’ve had a child, you have to live with a sense of responsibility and therefore hope. You can’t just be selfish and you can’t just give up on the world.” Ishtar lives the opposite way. 
 Frew intersperses the story with excerpts from Ishtar’s diary, which Silver finds years later. Ishtar’s essential selfishness, her immaturity, and her inability to take responsibility for her and her daughter’s life shine through. Silver is in awe of her mother’s beauty but that beauty underpins why Ishtar drifts from one inappropriate relationship to another, forcing Silver to the periphery of her young existence. Left to her own devices, even at 13, Silver is too self-sufficient a child. 
 The adult Silver reflects: 
 As an adult, Silver has risen above her poor beginnings. She has seized her educational opportunities and built a life based on normalcy and routine. But there is a hollowness to the adult Silver, stripped of that innocence, estranged from her mother and, significantly, never becoming a parent herself. 
 Calling her story Hope Farm seems ironic signposting on Frew’s part. The bleak and spiralling existence of Ishtar and Silver’s lives inspires anything but hope. Only in the dawning realisation that she is a separate person from her mother can Silver find a future. 
 Harder to accept as a reader is that at no point does Silver (or Frew) seem to judge Ishtar. Ishtar just is, in all her imperfection. And despite the diary conceit, she never seems quite real. 
 She is an idea of a mother rather than a real one, whereas Silver’s 13-year-old angst, her small joys and dark anger, are completely recognisable. Does the author’s own fear of exposing her children to hurt and distrust, her desire to maintain their innocence as long as possible, prevent her from fully mining the awfulness of Ishtar’s failings as a parent? 
 This refusal to judge her characters, to sharpen Silver’s rightful resentment or to allow Ishtar to redeem herself, might be restraint. For all Silver’s torment, so vivid and real on the page, there is no resolution in her feelings towards her mother. There’s no forgiveness, no harshness. But Hope Farm is a nuanced, painful novel. In exploring what happens to the love between a parent and child when the rules of that relationship dissolve, and where the freedoms overwhelm, Frew exposes the raw tenderness of loving but not being loved in return. For that, forgiveness may simply never be enough. 
 