I recall loud explosions two blocks north of where I was working in Greenwich Village, on a Friday morning in early 1970. It was my first job, fixing manuscripts for an indulgent and impecunious Italian publisher. I left my desk in time to see the flames and smoke from the ruined townhouse before police sealed off the street. We didn’t know this at the time, but the explosion was the work of well-heeled white radicals, who had created a bomb factory in a posh parents’ house while they were away on a Caribbean holiday. The radical group called themselves the Weathermen, borrowing from Bob Dylan, though they later changed their name to the more portentous the Weather Underground. 
 Urban bombers were far from new in the US, but they became prevalent, if not effective, in the 1970s until they died out in the Reaganesque 80s. This is the story compulsively told by Vanity Fair ’s Bryan Burrough. What distinguished these groups from their predecessors was 1960s revolutionary ideology, and the fact that so many of them came from relatively privileged backgrounds. Weathermen and women were college-educated, familiar with Mao, Carlos Marighella, Che, R&eacute;gis Debray, et al. They paid homage to black militants such as Eldridge Cleaver and Huey Newton. By the end of the 1960s, the FBI had declared war on the burgeoning Black Panther party, killing its leadership in a series of raids. For white radicals, police brutality, alongside the larger atrocity of Vietnam, appeared to indicate that America was ripe for violent revolution. 
 The new radicals staged orgies (“It looked like a piece of modern art” is how one of them described the heaving bodies). Charismatic Weatherman Bernardine Dohrn wore miniskirts and knee-length boots. She sported a badge inscribed “cunnilingus is fun, fellatio is fine”. After the Manson murders, she praised the killers. “Dig it,” she shouted. “First, they killed those pigs, then they ate dinner in the same room as them. They even shoved a fork into the victim’s stomach. Wild!” 
 After the Weathermen had blown themselves up, other groups appeared. Most bizarre was the west coast Symbionese Liberation Army. Led by ex-con Donald DeFreeze, they kidnapped the heiress Patty Hearst, forcing her wealthy family to institute a lavish, poorly organised programme of food distribution. There were never more than 10 Symbionese Army members. Their communiques were written in Buck Rogers-like Marxist jargon. “Death to the fascist insect that preys upon the lives of the people”, they began. Patty sided with her captors, taking part in robberies; and she came to symbolise the deviant zeitgeist of the 1970s. 
 In those distant days of primitive computers and the relative absence of CCTV cameras, it was possible to live underground for years. You sat in safe houses, smoked dope and concocted false identities. You blew up another recruiting centre and robbed a bank whenever funds were low. In between “actions” you could refamiliarise yourself with revolutionary texts or chill out each night with Johnny Carson on network television. It is clear from Burrough’s narrative that the “underground” achieved nothing whatsoever. They did sometimes kill cops, but this was often in error. (Underground revolutionaries failed to resolve the question of whether murder could be legitimate.) More often, they merely ruined corporate washrooms or lobbies. As the years went by, the terrorist left shrank numerically, along with its ambitions, as the need to stage robberies in order to acquire funds in the absence of benefactors became more pressing. 
 A fascinating aspect of this book is the degree to which both the FBI and police forces proved unable to capture radicals. Partly, this was a result of how small, even at the height of their notoriety, these groups really were. Another factor was J Edgar Hoover’s reluctance to apply the crude methods used on the Panthers on white radicals. 
 It would be reasonable to conclude this was another instance of FBI racism, but the truth, as Burrough shows, was subtler. There had been much criticism of the illegality of Hoover’s methods; some FBI men were indeed indicted. Most of the radicals who ultimately turned themselves in received lighter punishment than the Panthers. They went on to live privately, like Patty, who married her bodyguard, or they became teachers, social workers or professors. Sometimes, grey-haired, holding a candle for the faith, they hold reunions. 
 I read this book greedily, in search of the lost mix of violence and idealism that seeped through 1970s culture. There are a variety of lessons to be drawn from the Weathermen and their ilk. One of them must be that terrorism thrives only where states are tottering, or have failed, and this wasn’t the case in 1970s America. Another, more distressing, is that bombing, to create any sort of impact, has to be on a large scale. Our own, violence-plagued world remains vulnerable to a degree that was unimaginable when the 1970s bombers struck. 
 