To have a tattoo done, Michael Donaghy wrote, requires “a whim of iron”. With Happiness, Jack Underwood’s first collection, we seem at times to be in the presence of that whim as it applies its brightly coloured inks to matters of life and death. When his initial Faber pamphlet came out in 2009, Underwood appeared to show Donaghy’s influence, but now he recalls a poet of an older generation, Hugo Williams, for whom, as now for Underwood, the world is largely a personal matter composed of the problems of love and selfhood, as well as that of Frank O’Hara, whose presence is now as ubiquitous as weather, with his “Personism” manifesto seeming to promise access to all areas. 
 By moving in this direction Underwood has apparently renounced the implacable rigour on which Donaghy’s own playfulness was founded. At times, indeed, Underwood seems to be aspiring to invertebracy. In “Love Poem”, “The streets look like they want to be frying eggs / on themselves. I’m thinking of you and going / itchy from it. I keep expecting to see a nosebleed / on the hot, yellow pavement. Every thought is / a horse fly.” The cartoon detail, combined with a tone at once demonstrative and short of affect, mark a kind of indie house style that can be read (and perhaps more significantly, heard) almost anywhere at present. It’s not so much faux-naive as faux-urbane, emotion turning into attitude, defensive for all its apparent self-exposure. 
 Fortunately, Underwood is a much better poet than this might suggest. His work does actually notice things, rather than simply claiming to do so, and feel things, rather than simply announcing the fact. “William” greets a new-born child: “weighing your fine melon head, / your innocent daring to be, / and mouth-first searching, / your tiny fist is allowed absolutely / and I am uncooked”. Innocence, of a kind clung to like a pillow placed over an alarm clock, is perhaps his central subject for now. It is, inescapably, a studied state, composed partly of the innocent egotism that moves attention back from the child to the beholder, partly of openness to the steady rain of impressions and to the fleeting absoluteness of happiness and of “cack-handed LOVE”. 
 Combine these conditions with intense self-consciousness and it might all, to an ancient and sceptical reader, sound like adolescence outstaying its time. Yet as a depiction of conditions prevailing among many of Underwood’s generation (he was born in 1984), it sounds accurate. In the last half-century in the west, the process of getting older has ceased to necessitate (or perhaps even permit) what would once have been thought of as growing up – for example, in the wartime conditions in which Keith Douglas (dead at 24) or Wilfred Owen (dead at 26) wrote. 
 While being an example of it, Underwood is a valuable observer of this phenomenon. It often manifests itself as a performance of selfhood; for example, in its fearful, guilty anticipation. In “Poem of Fear for My Future Child”, it threatens to flower into a black narcissism: “I am such a dreadful future father; / I’m on the curb, crying. I’m a mess with your scarf. / All this fear, like a fizz building in a bad, grey egg, / is waiting for you.” By its own neurasthenic lights this may be honest, but it doesn’t wholly deflect the unworthy, unwanted and unprecedented urge to say: get out of the house more; take up the biathlon or cage-fighting. Instead, Underwood explains in “Canto XIII”, “If I want to get some cohesion, a treaty drawn up, / the process will have to be overseen (pathetically) / by my own self-pity in the form of a huge grey battleship.” And what a whimsical, winsome battleship that would be: very hard to resist sinking it with a deftly hurled rubber duck. 
 Altogether more substantial is “Wilderbeast”. This is partly a matter of the quality of attention Underwood brings to the series of nightmarish transformations through which, it seems, male sexuality reveals and condones itself, before a glimpse of the redemptive possibility of love and a final return to mirror-gazing: “I showed the devil your photo and he wept. / Flies fell buzzing from his cheeks. / You tempted and turned him // and the sun strained to look / as the perfect circle became a pool of water, / hardened into a mirror, // the mirror I’ve been staring into since, / in our bathroom, in our flat, / with the wilderness of seconds between us.” It’s an ambitious and energetic piece of work. It’s also, in contrast to some of the other poems here, attentive to line, to the tercets that frame the lines, and to the accumulating rhythmic consequences of a poem conceived as something more than a clever accident. 
 That Underwood has entertained not only this charged, highly wrought kind of work but also some narcotic inertia might indicate that he risks losing his way. But, on the other hand, he is not content to be the acolyte of a perceived formalist orthodoxy. He is after something that has yet to take shape. His talent is obvious even when he seems to be misapplying it. In music it used to be the third album that was the test, but time has accelerated, so a good deal will depend on what follows Happiness. 
 
