Someone should invent the literary equivalent of an Instagram filter to turn workaday prose Iain Sinclairean. It would calculate a rapt noirish vision from ordinary ambulatory sights such as that of a car-squashed bird: “A first-light pigeon catastrophe at the crown of a frosted road.” It would plug into a prodigious textual database, enabling the user to generate, on demand, erudite references to centuries of place-specific fact and fiction. And it would have a slider for varying the levels of sarcasm appropriate to mentionings of new-build flats, bankers and hipster pseudo-artisans. 
 Failing such an app, one might as well settle down for another unpredictable voyage with Sinclair himself. Having already done the M25 in London Orbital, he now conceives of a day’s tramp around the circular bit of the newish London Overground rail system. (Learning the moniker from some costumed art students in New Cross, he christens it the “Ginger line”, which was a new one on me.) He lights out from Haggerston one winter morning with his friend, film-maker and performer Andrew K&ouml;tting, who is stiff-cloth clad as though “for an HG Wells time-travelling romp”, and they do an entire circuit of the loop in a single day, sticking as close to the railway lines as possible. (They cheat once by riding the train one stop between Wapping and Rotherhithe rather than plodding through the choking infra-Thames tunnel, which seems fair enough.) 
 The Overground has been “a Viagra overload for property prices”, Sinclair notes, and he has fun with the made-up names of new flat developments: there is one in Haggerston called City Mills, “Which,” he comments drily, “is not in the City and was never a mill.” Yet the line also affords the space for a lot of dissident wall art, vividly evoked. As he and K&ouml;tting tramp semi-clownishly, or clown semi-trampishly, on their way, modes of writing succeed one other like styles of architecture. There is the urban-pastoral (a celebration of Southwark Park), the phantasmagorical (a sexploitation vision in darkening Hampstead) and the urbanely satirical: “Battersea High Street is now the kind of place where housemovers stencil FURNITURE LOGISTICS on the sides of their vans.” At Willesden Junction, Sinclair has an excess of inspiration and begins to compose a devil’s dictionary of architectural forms: “FOOTBALL STADIUM. A large, unexplained oval structure left empty for much of the time [...] PRISON. Inconvenient real estate in which the boarders refuse to pay their way [...] HOSPITAL. An instrument for inflating bureaucracy.” 
 Questions of food, pissing and sheer knee-trembling fatigue intrude on the itinerary with comic frequency, but the book is as much site-specific memoir as it is road movie. Here is where Sinclair visited the anti-psychiatrist RD Laing in his Belsize Park basement. Here is a brilliant standalone critical reminiscence of Angela Carter (thought of at Clapham Junction), and another one on JG Ballard (Chelsea Harbour), the memory of whom prompts Sinclair to propose: “Sedentary writers, coming to terms with the unquantifiable mystery of London, discover an inclination towards nihilistic violence.” There is a splendidly laboured (and all the funnier for it) joke, which I won’t spoil, about once spotting the Python Graham Chapman reading a book in the Freemasons Arms, NW3. Sinclair and K&ouml;tting detour to the house where Verlaine and Rimbaud stayed in 1873; the walk is also haunted by the ghosts of Beckett and John Clare. Only occasionally – usually, I found, when this walk was prompting Sinclair to describe other walks in the past, which tends to get a bit meta-walky – does the pace flag. 
 Overall, Overground is bound to have something to delight any bookish Londoner. This one just found it a shame that historical credit for its subject was blurred. The revived old East London line, through Dalston and Shoreditch, was indeed ceremonially opened as part of the Overground by Boris Johnson in 2010, as Sinclair notes early on. But let grateful metrosexuals remember that the whole Overground, including the then-projected eastern branch, was actually a Ken Livingstone project, opened six months before Johnson slid into office. Ken is mentioned twice in this book, but neither time in his capacity as presiding overlord of the Overground. So easily does bright, brutal London forget its benefactors. 
 Sinclair has spawned a baleful multitude of imitators, who produce deathly pompous books in the genre “I Went on a Long Walk and Thought About Some Things Importantly”, yet the point of the original, or so it seems to me, is not that he walks but that he writes. Walking is just the thing that gets his juices flowing – the act of locomotion jogs the memory, he explains, and walking with a friend is the best, and cheapest, form of psychotherapy. Near the book’s end, Sinclair and chum are still tramping through the night back towards east London, the other man’s boots swilling with God knows what: “I was a xylophone of improperly attached skeletal parts. K&ouml;tting was thick meat, sploshing and squelching, as blister-pods popped and burst in an obscene harvest.” At this point the reader is as grateful to be sitting in a comfortable chair as when reading accounts of shipwreck or mountain-based catastrophe. Long may the man’s legs hold out. 
 
