James Shapiro’s 1599: A Year in the Life of William Shakespeare was published to great acclaim 10 years ago. It opened with an atmospheric prologue – a freezing December morning in 1598; a dozen heavily armed men approaching a disused building in Shoreditch, east London. This is the famous scene of repossession, in which members of the Lord Chamberlain’s Men – Shakespeare’s company – conclude a long dispute with their landlord by dismantling the old playhouse called the Theatre and carting off its timbers to build a new venue in Southwark, the Globe. For Shakespeare it ushers in a year of thrilling theatrical achievements: Henry V, Julius Caesar and As You Like It are performed; Hamlet takes shape on paper. 
 The prologue of Shapiro’s new book is very different – not a scene of liberating aggression in the mean streets of Middlesex, but a glittery court masque at the Banqueting House in Whitehall, on 6 January 1606. It was an occasion both glamorous and propagandist, with King James in the audience and Queen Anne on stage in the part of Juno. The masque was Hymenaei, scripted by Ben Jonson, with costumes and special effects by Inigo Jones, choreography by Thomas Giles, and music by Alfonso Ferrabosco. It celebrated the wedding of the 3rd Earl of Essex, the son of the charismatic Elizabethan Earl who had lost his head in 1601. His bride was Frances Howard, 15 years old and already very “striking” (to use Shapiro’s laconic description of a young woman whose career would lurch in a few short years from Jacobean sex goddess to convicted but pardoned murderer). She was the daughter of the Earl of Suffolk, who had sat on the commission that condemned the groom’s father to death, so this arranged marriage served to heal old wounds and unite potentially destabilising factions. 
 The contrast between these prologues gives a sense of the different tones of these two companion volumes, or rather the different tones that Shapiro discerns in the life and mood of his enigmatic subject. In 1606 Shakespeare was 42, and a royal servant – the Chamberlain’s company had been granted the royal patent at the accession of James in 1603 and were now known as the King’s Men. His presence at the masque that evening is a reasonable inference. There are some unmistakable echoes of this one-night only performance in the language and staging of the nuptial masque in The Tempest. 
 In Shapiro’s reading, the older Shakespeare who surveys this scene of brittle sophistication is more jaundiced and to some extent – despite the benefits of being the King’s man – less certain about his career. That great flourish of fecundity at the turn of the century seems distant to him. He “struggled to find his footing in the early years of the reign”, Shapiro says, and wrote little in 1603-05 in comparison with other periods. (Shapiro favours the later date of 1607 for All’s Well that Ends Well, as recently argued by Laurie Maguire and others: this would indeed leave the early Jacobean cupboard pretty bare, but not everyone is convinced by the arguments.) And then there is a sense of the irrelevance and escapism of court entertainment: the spangled costumes and gossamer-thin poetry of Hymenaei. To be in the audience that evening, Shapiro writes, was an ideal “vantage point” for “measuring the chasm between the self-congratulatory political fantasy enacted in the masque and the troubled national mood outside the grounds of James’s palace”. 
 The chief theme of Shapiro’s 1606 is precisely Shakespeare’s profound engagement with that “troubled national mood”. In this year he produced three of his greatest tragedies – King Lear, Macbeth and Antony and Cleopatra. He had probably begun work on Lear the previous year: it drew on an old play, the True Chronicle History of King Leir, which was published in the summer of 1605. The latest of the three, Antony and Cleopatra, was certainly onstage by the end of 1606. It is an incredible burst of sustained creative labour, and Shapiro shows how powerfully these plays addressed the political and social upheavals of the time: they “collectively reflect their fraught cultural moment”. As Hamlet had said, in his famous advice to the players, the “purpose of playing” was not only to hold that universal “mirror up to nature”, but also to “show … the very age and body of the time his form and pressure”. 
 In England in 1606 the political landscape was dominated by a single event – the gunpowder plot of November 1605. This act by a desperate clique of Catholics – “5/11” as it is now sometimes called – had an explosive effect, even though the actual explosion was foiled. Its aftershocks are felt throughout Lear and Macbeth. They are plays that focus grimly on regicide, on civil strife, on a swift descent into violence and anarchy; and they are steeped in a gothic atmosphere of devils and hellfire that reflects the imagery of the plot fostered in government-approved pamphlets and engravings, and in the prosecution speeches of Sir Edward Coke and others. The unease exuded by these tragedies is as much a reaction to government hysteria – the anti-Catholic propaganda, the reprisals and interrogations, the extravagant displays of judicial butchery – as to the actual threat of Catholic terrorism. 
 Shapiro demonstrates once again his skill in shaping quantities of research into a brisk and enjoyable narrative. The material is extremely condensed but does not seem so. One could describe certain passages as tending to the “novelistic” – a dread word in some academic circles – but animating the historical data is very different from obscuring it with madeup conversations in unevidenced locations. There is, throughout, an attentively interrogative mood. Ever since his first book, Shakespeare and the Jews (1997), Shapiro has stressed his resistance to the anecdotal, myth-making tendencies of history, which are such a temptation for the biographer working in the early modern era, where so little remains. Such stories “retain their currency”, he wrote in that book, “because they tell us what we want to hear, even if at some level we know them to be untrue”. 
 For this sort of reason, any reader hoping this review of 1606 might include something about Shakespeare’s supposed affair with the vintner’s wife Jane or Jennet Davenant will be disappointed. The originator of the story was her son, whose name was William and who was born in 1606. He became a poet and playwright and was one of the chief revivers of Shakespeare after the theatrical drought of the Interregnum (1649–1660). He maintained he was Shakespeare’s “godson”, and when “pleasant over a glass of wine” – as John Aubrey reported – “seemed contented enough to be thought his son”. Shapiro sternly dismisses this as idle gossip. I am not sure at what level we know this story to be untrue (and I am not sure there isn’t a joke or two about the affair in a scene involving a flirtatious vintner’s wife, Mrs Mulligrub, in John Marston’s comedy The Dutch Courtesan, performed in 1604). But in a book so packed with incident, and so generous with insights, it would be frivolous to complain of a minor trail unpursued. 
 
