A mory Clay is at boarding school and working her way through the standard teenage rebellions – smoking, sexual experimentation, talking back to a headteacher who’d like to persuade her to try for Oxford – when her father arrives on an unexpected visit. He is cheery, handsome and confident, a successful short-story writer who has produced nothing since service in the trenches. He takes her for a drive in the countryside, past where she thinks they might stop, towards a castle – perhaps there is a tea shop? – but no, they keep going, right into a lake. No one dies (he was misinformed about its depth), but she is thus notified how war and the effects of war will run through her 20th-century life like a rotten seam, cracking open what seems solid ground, twisting through generations, reappearing in unforeseen ways. She takes time off school, sits exams badly; there is no more mention of Oxford. 
 Sweet Caress is her story, told plain by herself, from the beginning – the mother who “managed to conceal whatever affection she felt for her children with great success”, the variously exceptional siblings, the father subjected to shock therapy and finally to a lobotomy, making him smilingly undangerous. And the parallel beginning, when, at seven, she is given a camera by an uncle invalided out of the air force and now a photographer. School ends and she joins him in London, to be his assistant and a photographer in her own right, using her camera to support herself, express herself, as a passport – to Berlin, New York, France at war, Vietnam – and as a shield. The account is intercut with her present-day journal of a comfortable, drink-tinged life in a cottage on the Scottish coast. 
 In Sweet Caress Boyd has hit on the hugely successful innovation, for fiction, of using real, found photos, scattered through the story, illustrating it. It’s a variation on, and a whole-hearted return – after three thrillers, and his well received James Bond novel Solo – to a method he obviously finds rewarding: the irruption of the real into the fictional (or vice versa). In Nat Tate: An American Artist 1928-1960 Boyd created such a convincing biography of an invented artist that a painting purportedly by Tate (but actually completed in an afternoon by Boyd himself) sold at Sotheby’s for £7,250. Most famously, Any Human Heart is the diary of Logan Mountstuart, born 1906, died 1991, having met, in a louche and not always trustworthy life, many of the important cultural personages of the century. Certainly the cradle-to-grave narrative provides a useful structure – and a rich tension between the ordering, meaning-imposing tendencies of fiction and the inconclusiveness of real life. 
 It’s also a useful framework in which to demonstrate moral and intellectual development. In Any Human Heart the challenge – well achieved – was partly to engineer encounters with real people in a plausible manner. Such coincidences, however, are famously more believable in reality than they are in fiction. In Sweet Caress Boyd gets around the problem by encountering reality glancingly, or off stage. Amory might be in the same room as the Prince of Wales, but not meet him; the closest she gets is when she’s invited to a party at the Paris Ritz and “felt as if I was in some weird parlour game. Who would I meet next? Marlene Dietrich? Maurice Chevalier? Oscar Wilde?” She sees (but does not speak to) Robert Capa, Irwin Shaw, John Steinbeck. “And then” – it’s a sharp, almost self-mocking joke on Boyd’s part – “Marlene Dietrich walked in.” When Amory finally publishes a book of war photography it contains a woman shining shoes, soldiers larking about off-duty, a pilot at rest; the mundane things that continue around the edges of a war. 
 Boyd has written before about the democratising effect of the camera, how literally anyone has the potential, accidentally or on purpose, to take a good photograph. It is also gender-equalising: taking photographs, especially in the early days of war photography – in Vietnam accreditation was easy to come by, the only requirements a camera and a focused will – means that like Hope Clearwater, Boyd’s primatologist narrator in Brazzaville Beach, Amory can move relatively easily in a male world. Amory, also like Hope, has a matter-of-fact, almost male sexual attitude – aided by the narrative device of a kick in the stomach from a Mosley fascist making her infertile. “You may find,” says her mother quietly, when she is given her diagnosis, “it’s a blessing in disguise.” 
 As so often with Boyd, Sweet Caress is written with a hale, old-fashioned confidence in realism. He has a vivid sense of place and of things and writes extremely efficient plots – if, in this book, occasionally rather too telegraphed. There are good lines: after Amory is helicoptered out of a war zone, designated a “lightly wounded casualty (civilian)”, Boyd lets the phrase resonate until it describes her whole life. But there are too many moments when the writing is flabby or even anachronistic, with a worryingly high incidence of perceptual cliche. “I’ll have to think about that,” she says, when told of her infertility, “take it on board.” This may of course be intentional, Amory being of a class and time when emotional understatement ruled. And she is a photographer, not a writer, moreover one whose best effects are candid rather than stylised. A certain naivety, then, might be defensible – but the responses she prompts in those she meets and loves are to a more intelligent, spikier person than is suggested by her voice, which thus becomes disconcertingly untethered from the character it is meant to convey. Too often I found myself looking forward to the quiddity of the photographs: the real persistently threatened to upstage the fiction. 
 
