With the first two of his three elegant, stylish and ambiguous novels – The Forgiven in 2012, The Ballad of a Small Player last year, and now Hunters in the Dark – Lawrence Osborne elicited comparisons to Graham Greene, Evelyn Waugh, James Salter, Paul Bowles, among others. He seems to be a revenant from a species that has, paradoxically, become almost extinct following the triumph of globalisation: the traveller (or travel-writer)-novelist. Indeed, Osborne describes himself as having led “a nomadic life”, living in Paris, New York City, Mexico, Istanbul and Bangkok. The novels reflect this: The Forgiven is set in Morocco, Ballad in the gambling dens of Macau, Hunters in the Dark in Cambodia; all feature westerners running up against, or adrift in, cultures that remain opaque to them. For Osborne, the mysteriousness of these non-western cultures is not an excuse to satisfy anew the jaded occidental appetite for exoticism. Instead, he seems to be engaged in turning inside out, in startling ways, that old Jamesian theme of the confrontation of old and new worlds, of innocence versus experience, except that the new world here is the European one, “dying on its feet of torpor and smugness and debt”, from which Osborne’s protagonists are in full flight. 
 One such figure is 28-year old Robert, the central character of Hunters in the Dark. A schoolteacher in the tiny Sussex village of Elmer, Robert knows that his provincial English life is a cul-de-sac. The anomie that afflicts him is really despair at the pettiness and claustrophobia of England, at “a way of life that justified itself as being the pinnacle of freedom, but [which] had not come up with an alternative reason for existing once the freedom had been sucked out of it”. He leaves for Thailand, slowly settling into the decision not to return to that hated old life. The novel opens with Robert crossing over the border to Cambodia and gambling with the last of his savings to win $2,000. This stroke of luck sets into motion the machinery of a plot that comes to resemble a Newton’s cradle, one sphere colliding with another and transferring its energy and momentum to it, and so on, in a long, complex series. 
 Robert hires a driver, Ouksa, to take him around the sights and before long they run into a young American man, Simon Beaucamp, urbane, well dressed, handsome. Robert moves out of the flophouse in which he is staying and into the American’s beautiful house on the river, despite warnings from Ouksa. Although it extends the horizons of the genre, Osborne’s book remains a thriller on one level, so what happens next is best not revealed. 
 Our hero finds himself in Phnom Penh, without any of his belongings, such as his bag, his passport and his winnings. Another stroke of luck occurs: he is engaged as an English tutor to a beautiful young Khmer woman, Sophal, the daughter of the rich Dr Sar, but Robert decides to call himself Simon Beaucamp in this new life. Meanwhile, the real Simon resurfaces in another strand of the story; in this, we’ll encounter the chilling and amoral Davuth, a policeman who was a killer and torturer in the Pol Pot regime, with a key role to play in the plot. Ouksa, too, will resurface, as will Simon’s Khmer girlfriend, Sothea; both are crucial players in the story. 
 Dramatic irony, used sharply by Osborne, keeps the narrative edgy and gripping, but it is the meditation on luck, or chance, and the irrational, carried over from his previous novel, that gives Hunters its meaning. Robert is a deeply innocent man in an ancient land that has emerged from a period of immense trauma, and while his innocence is both alluring and dangerous, his rationalist European mentality is woefully unequipped to read a culture that places such great store on the irrational – on signs, omens, dreams, on the sixth sense, on ghosts and spirits; in short, everything that the European Enlightenment taught the western world to deride and debunk. 
 As events remain inexplicable to him throughout, Robert retains his “beautifully ignorant” self to the very end, but Osborne gives a sense of his European certainties eroding: “Karma swirled around all things, lending them destinies over which mere desire had no control. It made one’s little calculations irrelevant.” It is a serious curtailment of the rationalist individualism that motors western life and has given rise, Osborne implies, to the drift and desperation of Robert’s generation. In fact, that Newton’s cradle of several unrelated lives brought into proximity by chance is the working out, on the level of plot, of the vector produced by several colliding systems of belief – Buddhist “dharma”, superstition, premonition, rationalism, even the teachings of the dreaded Angkar that had resulted in one of the worst genocides of the last century. Accordingly, recurrent images, tropes, metaphors of the irrational and portentous – a colony of bats, disturbed, rising up as one black mass; ghosts; astonishing cloud formations – provide an underlying structure to the novel. 
 Written with unfailing precision and beauty, Hunters in the Dark stakes out territory different from the many writers to whom Osborne has been compared. 
 
