I magine one of the country’s great art collections was opened up to you – you could move things around, dust off the half-forgotten stuff in the basement, shine light on the works you love. What would you do? What story would you tell? This is the idea behind Simon Schama’s The Face of Britain, a book and TV series based on the National Portrait Gallery. First founded to house the portraits of “those persons who are most honourably commemorated in British history as warriors or as statesmen, or in arts, in literature or in science”, the gallery becomes, in Schama’s hands, the basis for a new face-to-face history of the UK. 
 Schama is, in many ways, the ideal person to undertake a project such as this. In The Embarrassment of Riches, he merged the study of art, literature and politics to forge a compelling and original account of Dutch culture in the 17th-century “golden age”. What he called his “shameless eclecticism” in the choice of sources and objects of study was married to a prose style – bright, sharp, amused and amusing – that would make his bestselling Citizens: A Chronicle of the French Revolution read like an irresistibly pacy novel. Two years ago, his The Story of the Jews was a masterpiece of documentary television. 
 Running through Schama’s work is an argument about the importance of style to scholarship, and an attempt to make often arcane ideas speak to a modern audience. What’s disappointing, then, about The Face of Britain is that the faculties of close observation and keen criticism that characterise Schama at his best are largely missing. From the off, he argues that the act of looking is what makes us human in the first place. But for all the talk of the importance of the steady gaze in a selfie-saturated culture, there’s surprisingly little real looking here. Instead, our attention is drawn away from the beautifully reproduced images – from Richard Cosway’s eerie 18th-century miniature of the Prince of Wales’s eye to Lewis Carroll’s photographs of Alice Liddell – and towards great wodges of backstory. 
 Schama is rightly interested in the relationships between sitter and artist, portrait and public, but the overwhelming impression is of analysis crowded out by anecdote. So we read about Churchill having his cigar snatched out of his hand before being photographed by Yousuf Karsh in 1941. This chapter (one of two about portraits of Churchill) concludes that the resultant image “spoke to millions of invincible resolution”. 
 A lengthy chapter about the 17th-century love affair between Kenelm Digby and his wife Venetia circles the unsettling portrait painted by Van Dyck of Venetia’s corpse, lying on her deathbed with one hand against her cheek; but again, the painting is mere backdrop to the breathless retelling of a story of obsession and grief. The up-close-and-personal Schama of his study of Rembrandt is almost totally absent here: the Schama of The Face of Britain is a garrulous tour guide, seemingly more interested in patter than portrait. This is art history at a glance. 
 Of course, there are cases in which the work and the story are inseparable. Jonathan Richardson was an important 18th-century theorist of the visual arts, but also a tireless observer of his own face as he grew older. “Every morning through the 1730s, Richardson rose early and, by light of the dawning day, or else candle and lamp, peered at his own countenance for information on the progress or retreat of his moral condition.” In pencil or chalk, week after week, Richardson slowly put together a collection of drawings that make up a “visual autobiography”, “the most compulsive and relentless self-scrutiny in all of British art”. (This judgment is somewhat undermined eight pages later when Schama says that the observation of a Samuel Palmer self-portrait is “the most tightly focused in all of British art”.) 
 There are still fine moments in which the old Schama is in evidence. There is a lovely account of chasing a medieval illuminator named William de Brailes through the manuscripts in which he painted images of himself being protected by the Archangel Michael or touched by the hand of God. It’s a useful reminder that the self-portrait was not always “a statement about the hero-artist in all his singularity, poetically apart from the world that gave him work”: De Brailes’s self-representations speak of patronage and piety in the visual language of their time. 
 Similarly excellent is a chapter titled “The Bodies of Women”, which explores the uneasy relationships between male portraitists and female models, and the ways in which artists such as Gwen John and Laura Knight questioned the sexual politics of the 20th-century art world. The self-portraits by John, four of which are reproduced here, are breathtaking. A section on the collaboration between Henry Tonks, the imposing surgeon turned draughtsman and teacher at the Slade School of Art, and the surgeon Harold Gillies, famous for his work on facial reconstruction in the aftermath of the first world war, is genuinely moving. 
 These glimpses of something deeper and more complicated, though, are too rare and fleeting. Schama is liberal with the half-truths and comforting myths of British national character that have become so central to popular history writing. The preface announces that “if we know one thing about the British, it is their perennial suspicion of the self-preening of the Great and the Good”. The photographer Charlie Phillips is described as apologising “Britishly” for showing emotion when talking about the now-vanished Notting Hill of the 1960s. Gwen John’s Nude Girl – Fenella Lovell – looks “directly, challengingly, unapologetically” at the viewer: “so fiercely un-English”. 
 Maybe these cliches are a sign of the times. We live in the age of the Very British Story. Very British Stories are our bestselling books and primetime documentaries, and while their subjects are interchangeable, their arguments remain the same. One, that there is something peculiarly British about a phenomenon – dance, romance, portraits, cake, you name it. And two, that the story of that phenomenon is the story of Britain itself. Writing of the savagely hilarious satirical prints of 18th-century Britain, Schama writes that “for the first time in history – anywhere – politics had become entertainment”. When he argues that politics-as-entertainment began in the prints of James Gillray or Mary Darly (as opposed to in the political jabs of Greek theatre, or the carnival humour of 16th-century religious satire, or any of the countless other alternative examples), he is telling a Very British Story, and one grounded in national pride rather than historical fact. 
 Schama is a historian with the cultural reach and critical nous to challenge some of the all-too-familiar tales of British history – to unpick national myths and ask awkward questions – but he has chosen to use the canvases of the National Portrait Gallery to tell the same old story. Churchill, Hogarth, Elizabeth I, Gainsborough, Cromwell, Reynolds – the gang’s all here. To have the opportunity to hold a mirror up to Britain is a historian’s dream. For the result to be so unreflective is a shame. 
 
