In the early hours of 16 December 1944, the Germans launched their last great offensive of the second world war against weakly held US positions in the Ardennes Forest, the site of their original Blitzkrieg success against the French in 1940. They would enjoy the same early breakthrough, but this time against inexperienced American troops who, taken completely by surprise, either surrendered or fell back (thereby creating the famous bulge in the allied line that gave the battle its more familiar name). But there the comparisons end. 
 In 1940 German troops were attacking solely on the western front against two largely bankrupt armies: the French and the British. By late 1944 they were fighting on multiple fronts – on the Rhine, in Italy and in Poland – against the combined might of the (rejuvenated) British and Commonwealth, US and Russian armies. The allies enjoyed almost complete air superiority and a massive advantage in firepower, particularly tanks and artillery pieces. There was, as a result, no longer any realistic hope that a single offensive – however successful – was likely to change the course of the war. 
 Of course – as Antony Beevor explains in this wonderfully compelling follow-up to D-Day – Hitler did not agree and was prepared to gamble everything on an attack that would, he hoped, split the western allies, force the Canadians out of the war and the British into “another Dunkirk”. It was “an act of desperation”, admitted one of Hitler’s senior commanders, “but we had to risk everything”. 
 Two panzer armies – the bulk of Germany’s remaining armour – were assigned the task of reaching the Belgian port of Antwerp. Few of Hitler’s generals believed this was possible, preferring a “small solution” such as the envelopment of the US armies holding the Ardennes sector or reaching the river Meuse; others argued that the concentration of all German reserves in the west would leave the east vulnerable to the expected Russian offensive on the Vistula in Poland. But Hitler was adamant. “In our current situation,” explained his operations chief, “we cannot shrink from staking everything on one card.” 
 For the many ardent Nazis taking part, the objective was not ultimate victory but the phoenix-like rebirth of the nation (a concept made popular by the great Prussian military theorist Carl von Clausewitz). “Fighting until the last moment,” claimed one, “gives a people the moral strength to rise again. A people that throws in the sponge is finished for all time.” 
 Elite Waffen-SS formations featured prominently in the attack: the panzer army spearheading the offensive contained no fewer than four SS panzer divisions, including the infamous 9th Hohenstaufen that a few months earlier had decimated British airborne troops at Arnhem (“a bridge too far”). The SS were given the pick of the best equipment and tanks, and would be responsible for numerous murders. They were not, however, the most effective soldiers. A senior commander later claimed that the non-SS panzer formations should have led the breakthrough, and not vice versa. 
 The initial success enjoyed by the German offensive was, according to Beevor, down to a number of factors: the element of surprise (not even middle-ranking German officers knew about the attack until the very last moment); a failure of allied intelligence; and the poor quality of many US troops facing the onslaught. “The replacements,” wrote one veteran, “both officers and men, are green. They don’t know how to take care of themselves. They become casualties very fast sometimes… It is hard to get them worked in as members of the team.” 
 This enabled the Germans – attacking in a snowy landscape of “thick woods, rocky gorges, small streams, few roads and saturated firebreak trails” – to make deep inroads into the US defences during the first few days of combat. But for every unit that capitulated without putting up a decent fight, another fought heroically, thus slowing down the German advance while reserves plugged the gap. 
 The most famous defensive action was fought at Bastogne, a crucial road and rail junction, where the 101st Airborne held out until relieved on Boxing Day. Beevor gives the 101st its due, but also mentions that other less heralded artillery and armoured units played their part. 
 Perhaps the most shocking aspect of the battle was the willingness of both sides to commit atrocities. The Waffen-SS troops routinely shot captives and civilians, notably at Malmedy where 84 American prisoners were murdered. But the US troops responded by executing not only German soldiers in American uniforms – some of whom were Otto Skorzeny’s American speaking commandos who were sent behind the lines to cause chaos – but also ordinary Wehrmacht. Especially troubling to Beevor is the fact that “a number of generals… openly approved of the shooting of prisoners in retaliation”. 
 Of those allied generals, few emerge from the battle with much credit. The exceptions are Dwight D Eisenhower, the Supreme Commander, who kept his head when all about him were losing theirs; George S Patton, who rapidly and selflessly moved troops to the threatened sector (thereby giving up plans for his own offensive); and Bernard Montgomery who, recognising the seriousness of the breakthrough, made early moves to protect the vital bridges over the Meuse (and was rewarded with the temporary command of two US armies). But Montgomery then overplayed his hand by exaggerating his contribution and demanding strategic control of the allied invasion of Germany, and was subsequently sidelined. “Monty is a tired little fart,” wrote Patton. “War requires the taking of risks and he won’t take them.” 
 In the end the Germans never got near the Meuse, let alone Antwerp, and the battle was effectively over by Christmas Day, though it took another month of hard fighting to flatten the “bulge”. Both sides suffered about 80,000 casualties – only 20,000 more than the British army sustained in a single day’s fighting on the Somme in 1916 – though a further 30,000 civilians were killed and wounded. 
 It was a short, brutal and ultimately futile battle – the last spasm of a dying regime – and no one has recounted it better than Beevor. His gripping, beautifully written narrative moves seamlessly from the generals’ command posts to the privates in their snow-covered foxholes, and confirms him as the finest chronicler of war in the business. His particular genius is for ferreting out those telling details that paint a picture. “One man,” he writes, “found a friend dead in the frozen street face down with a cat sitting on his back, profiting from the last of the body’s heat.” 
 Having sown the wind in the Ardennes, Hitler reaped the whirlwind on the eastern front when the Russians’ January offensive made huge gains. The German leadership had gambled and lost in the west by misjudging, in Beevor’s words, “the soldiers of an army they had affected to despise”. 
 