In his 1988 collection, Beaivi, &aacute;hč&aacute;žan ( The Sun, My Father ), the great Northern Sami poet, musician and activist Nils-Aslak Valkeap&auml;&auml; included one poem that caused particular problems for his translator, the writer and scholar Harald Gaski. The poem (272 in the sequence) consists of three strands of text, one of which “represents different reindeer, according to their age, their appearance, whether they are male or female, whether they are spotted or have any other kind of special marks and so on”. For example, the word beaiveluosttat signifies “reindeer with a streak of lighter hair along the side with thicker, more even hair than on the rest of its body, this streak only appearing in the reindeer’s third year”, while liidneoaivi means “a reindeer with a white head, but not one whose body is spotted”. Clearly, there was no way of rendering these terms in Norwegian (or indeed, any other language), which meant that Gaski was obliged to leave it “untranslated in the Scandinavian rendition of Valkeap&auml;&auml;’s book, because the Scandinavian languages lack the equivalent terms for reindeer. Thus the limitations of the Scandinavian languages are laid bare, they are unable to match or rival Sami in regard to explaining with exact preciseness the content and consequences of Sami experiences... The larger claim to make would be to assume that the sort of sophistication shown regarding reindeer is potentially applicable to other phenomena as well, so one does not have to be particularly interested in reindeer to be impressed with the intellectual complexity of a language that can do what Sami can do in one word.” 
 A story like this is salutary because it reminds us that indigenous people, whether in the Arctic Circle or the Australian bush, have always known what some people in the so-called developed world are just discovering: that language and the land are continuous. Indigenous people have always known that the land (and the other, human and non-human, creatures who live there) informs the language of its inhabitants. Only an illiterate invader thinks of this river, that herd of bison, or the wind itself as a mere resource; only a benighted land-management consultant can blissfully ignore the fact that our relationship to the land around us is, or should be, a dialogue and that participation in that dialogue can involve deep knowledge, not only of the words, but also of the things they denote. This is what makes Robert Macfarlane’s Landmarks so important: described as “a celebration and defence of the language of landscape”, it actually goes further by enriching, not only our vocabulary of land terms, but also our ways of seeing. To know the words currel (an East Anglian term for a small stream), or drindle (a “diminutive run of water, smaller than a currel”), not to mention the many words that the dialects of these islands have for varieties of snow, is to enter into a new relationship with the natural world. To have the words is to become more perceptive, more attentive – and, we can only hope, more capable of caring for rivers, bison and the windy uplands where our rarest birds shelter. As Macfarlane points out: “ Smeuse is a dialect noun for ‘the gap in the base of a hedge made by the regular passage of a small animal’; now I know the word ‘smeuse’, I will notice these signs of creaturely movement more often.” 
 One inspiration for Landmarks was a document created by a group of Western Islanders, entitled “Some Lewis Moorland Terms: A Peat Glossary”. The authors of this document, Finlay Macleod, Anne Campbell, Catriona Campbell and Donald Morrison, concentrating on only three townships on Lewis, came up with more than 120 terms, “notable for their compressive precision”, including m&ograve;ine dubh (the heavier and darker peats that lie deeper and older into the moor) and l&egrave;ig-chruthaich (quivering bog with water trapped beneath it, and an intact surface). These terms are quickly being lost. Macleod notes that “as people’s working relationship with the moorland has changed, the keen sense of conservation that went with it has atrophied”. With the glossary as their chief weapon, however, the Lewis islanders fought off the threat of 234 wind turbines, each 140 metres high (a development proposed by the Amec corporation) by drawing together “accounts – narrative, lexical, poetic, painterly, photographic, historical, cartographical – which, taken in sum or interleaved, might restore both particularity and mystery to the moor”, and thus counter the views of people like James Carnegy-Arbuthnott, an estate owner in Angus, who claimed that it was fine for so few people to own so much of Scotland because it was mostly “unproductive wilderness”. (The EU seems to disagree: according to the Herald newspaper, £591.7m was paid out to 19,848 Scottish landowners in 2009 alone ). 
 In the end, the Scottish executive rejected Amec’s proposal – which had to be quite a victory, as this government is one of the least concerned, and apparently the least informed, about the dangers such developments pose to wild land. We need only remark on the battle that has been waged against Sustainable Shetland, who have been trying to protect their ancient peatlands against a similar threat posed by Viking Energy (presumably the company chose this name with no sense of its inherent irony), and have so far failed, in spite of an extraordinarily strong case, and a high court judge’s ruling that the Viking proposal failed to take into account environmental factors such as EU bird directives. In spite of this ruling, and the simple fact known to ecologists everywhere that to disturb ancient peatlands is to add significantly to atmospheric greenhouse gases, the Scottish government took the Viking case to appeal and, not surprisingly, won. The question, however, is why? That one campaign should succeed, while another, similar attempt to protect our wild lands (a campaign backed, moreover, by all the major environmental NGOs) should fail suggests that ministers are more worried about public opinion than about the land they should be sworn to protect. 
 That peatlands, like forests and great rivers and prairies, die because corporations (whether they be in energy production, agribusiness or real estate “development”) and our “business-friendly” governments so decree is, in part, a consequence of our lack of knowledge, not only of the language, but also the realities of the land. At the very least, we need the words to understand complex ecologies – but what happens when those words are gone? Macfarlane notes that, in the new edition of the Oxford Junior Dictionary, there has been “a culling of words concerning nature”, with a comparable increase in words related to electronics, resulting in “the outdoor and the natural being displaced by the indoor and the virtual”. It should, perhaps, come as no surprise that an educational publisher would push the skills, vocabularies included, that best serve the capitalist system in which it is embedded, but this example is yet one more signpost in the process of denaturing human existence that has been going on since the industrialisation of the “developed” world. Right now, it is difficult enough to fight environmentally degrading schemes – like the Viking project – that have strong government backing, use clever PR “greenwashing” tactics and can exert undue power over local opinion by the use of so-called community benefits and incentives; what hope will there be in the future, when an even smaller number of people know what arenaceous, or faks or saatbrak mean? Landmarks is a book that ought to be read by policymakers, educators, armchair environmentalists and active conservationists the world over. If we are to defend the land from further degradation, we have to begin by knowing what it is we are talking about. 
 