Tangier, Mathias Enard writes in Street of Thieves, is famous “chiefly for the people who leave it”. Take, for example, the explorer Ibn Battutah. He left Tangier in 1325 and travelled through much of Africa, the Middle East, eastern Europe and Asia. When he finally returned home, 30 years later, he wrote Rihla, an account of his adventures and one of the most important narratives we have of life in the 14th century. 
 Lakhdar, this novel’s 18-year-old narrator, will also leave home and write about it. Though his journeys are limited to Morocco, Tunisia and Spain, they provide a glimpse into the tremors of the Arab spring, the threat of Islamic fundamentalism, and the indignados movement in Spain. 
 These subjects may seem ripped from the headlines, but they are not unusual for Enard, a French novelist whose work often focuses on war and political conflict. His first novel, La Perfection du Tir, from 2003, was told from the point of view of a sniper in a civil war, possibly the Lebanese civil war. The prizewinning Zone, first released in 2008, is a single-sentence story about a spy who wants to expose war crimes in several countries bordering the Mediterranean. 
 As Street of Thieves opens, Lakhdar is just another Moroccan boy who spends his days watching the ferries that cross the Strait of Gibraltar. In the summer, he and his friend Bassam smoke kif and ogle women, especially scantily clad tourists. One day Lakhdar is caught in bed with his cousin Meryem, whose “half-transparent housedresses” were driving him mad with lust. Feeling dishonoured, Lakhdar’s father beats him up and throws him out of the house. He also beats up Meryem and packs her off to a remote village in the Rif mountains. 
 About Lakhdar’s family or what could have compelled such a vicious reaction, we learn nothing, aside from the usual cliches: the father is pious and abusive (“a man of a single book, but a good one, the Qur’an”); the mother is pious and submissive (“my mother moaned in a corner”). 
 Now homeless, Lakhdar travels south, surviving by begging, thieving and prostitution. Some months later, he returns to Tangier, where he finds that Bassam has become friends with Sheikh Nureddin, a friendly and articulate scholar who has started a Muslim Group for the Propagation of Qur’anic Thought. Lakhdar is hired as their bookseller, a job that provides him with a place to live and enough free time to indulge his passion: reading crime novels. 
 But the quiet life doesn’t last. Shortly after the Arab spring protests reach Morocco, Bassam and a group of louts beat up a bookseller and burn down his shop on the pretext that he sold soft-porn magazines: Lakhdar is surprised at his own participation. The next day he meets a Spanish student named Judit Foix, and wonders if he would have taken part in the attack had he met her 24 hours earlier. That he should ask himself this question is perhaps a testament to how alienated he is, not just from his family, but from himself. 
 Then Sheikh Nureddin and Bassam vanish, just as a bomb explodes in a popular cafe in Marrakesh. Fearing that the police may come looking for him, Lakhdar decides to disappear as well. He travels to Tunisia to meet Judit, becomes a ferry hand, works for a mortician in Tarifa, and eventually moves to Barcelona. His wanderlust is caused not by a desire to see new places, but to get away from trouble in the old ones. He is an outsider, an interloper, an undocumented immigrant, always subject to forces greater than him. 
 As a political type, Lakhdar is interesting. Like thousands of other north Africans, he is fed up with state repression, yet finds no viable alternative to the government, which makes him susceptible to the ideas of the Islamists. A mix of Candide and Forrest Gump, he grows as a result of his interactions with the people he meets on his travels. As well as learning about politics, Lakhdar also undergoes a literary education: he reads Battuta, Tayeb Salih, Naguib Mahfouz and Mohamed Choukri, finding that “faith was a dead skin that reading books had sloughed off me”. 
 But as a character, Lakhdar remains underdeveloped. We never learn much about his life prior to the incident that causes him to be cast out of his home. He has no memories of anything that happened before that day and rarely thinks about the family he left behind. It is as if he were born on the page. 
 Enard is an ambitious writer and his prose, in Charlotte Mandell’s translation, has moments of devastating clarity. He draws interesting connections between disaffected youths in Morocco, Tunisia and Spain, and the different ways in which they voice their political discontent. In the end, however, his characters remain too thin to bear the weight of his political observations. 
 
