In recent times, political scandals have diminished in scale. A front-bench spokesman persuades his wife to lie to retain his driving licence. A deputy prime minister has an affair with his secretary. A backbencher uses public money to buy a raft for the ducks on his lake. A more robust age would hardly have noticed these occurrences, and Michael Bloch’s long-awaited life of Jeremy Thorpe sets out the wildest political scandal of the century. Written some time ago, it was published, at Thorpe’s request, in the days immediately following his death in December last year. The sequence of events – here given authoritative and plausible form for the first time – and the world in which they take place have grown more, not less incredible in the 35 years since the climax of the story. It all now beggars belief. 
 The scandal, which has passed somewhat from the collective memory, took place in the late 1960s when Thorpe, the leader of one of the main political parties in the UK, had already had, and was continuing to have, promiscuous sexual affairs with many men – acquaintances, friends and strangers. Some of these had proof of the politician’s then illegal behaviour and were successfully extorting payments in cash from the party. One, whose proof was better than most, was in receipt of a weekly payment. The party officer in charge of making these payments, incidentally, was the best man at Thorpe’s wedding and what would later vulgarly, but accurately, come to be termed his “fuckbuddy”. 
 After some time, the demands from this former lover, Norman Scott, grew noisier and more threatening. By this time, in the electoral arithmetic of the time, Thorpe was coming very close to holding the balance of power in a hung parliament, and was respectably married to a divorced royal countess. He seems first to have speculated out loud about the possibility of quietly murdering Scott; then to have gone on suggesting that it would be a good idea; then to have solicited £20,000 from a rich businessman to support the party, which he immediately funnelled to his supporters and intimates, who used it to hire a hitman. The assassin cornered Scott on the Devon moors, shot and killed his dog, but failed to kill Scott after his antique gun jammed. He was sent to prison, and on release told as much of his story as he could. Thorpe resigned as leader of his party and was prosecuted for conspiracy to murder Scott. The judge summed up heavily in Thorpe’s favour, the chair of the jury was a Liberal party activist, and Thorpe and his co-conspirators got off. There seems no doubt that Scott, though hysterical and mentally unstable, was essentially correct in his story. Thorpe came within a whisker of government in negotiations with the outgoing prime minister, Edward Heath, in February 1974, and shortly afterwards acquiesced, at the very least, in the attempted murder of one of many men he had had illicit sex with in the preceding years. As I say, the mood in politics has changed somewhat. 
 The Thorpe story is, above all, about privilege, and what privilege thought it could get away with in the decades after the war. By the standards of his own class, Thorpe was probably a frightful cad, beginning with the cad’s upbringing of being sent away to an expensive refuge in North America during the war. His grandmother was so snobbish about her husband’s relations that she only married him on condition that he never see them again. At Eton he was known as Oily Thorpe, and on being summoned for national service in 1947, promptly got himself excused by faking epileptic fits. At Oxford he acquired a reputation as a wit and a brilliant mimic, which would follow him; perhaps more to the point, his machinations in student politics led Robin Day, a contemporary, to remark that no one who had known him at university would ever trust him again. 
 The extraordinary details of Thorpe’s sex life during a time that was far from permissive makes the mind boggle. It was certainly a time when those in privileged positions took astonishing risks – once, in a London fog, the Labour MP Tom Driberg is said to have given a surprised policeman a blow job on Hungerford bridge. Many witnesses survive to give Bloch a detailed account, one presumes, of Thorpe’s sexual manners: “He would arrive for an amorous assignation in his formal clothes, lay aside his furled umbrella and copy of the Times, carefully undress – and then behave with animal passion.” Waiters, Buckingham Palace footmen at state banquets, rent boys, black Africans while on fact-finding missions, art historians, and upper-class thugs are documented as frequenters of Thorpe’s bed. A politically active gay San Franciscan called Bruno was the recipient of such impassioned letters from Thorpe (on House of Commons paper) that the FBI, keeping Bruno under surveillance, firmly advised that Thorpe would not be given a visa to visit in the near future. 
 How did he think he would get away with it? How, indeed, did he get away with it, since Scott gave incriminating letters to the police in the early 1960s, and everyone who took the slightest interest in Thorpe knew what his conduct was like? (He was the second of Antony Armstrong-Jones’s proposed best men at his 1960 wedding to Princess Margaret to be officially vetoed on the grounds of being a conspicuously promiscuous homosexual.) Sheer effrontery played a part, as did class solidarity, and daring the powers-that-be to take action against him – a privy councillor, the heir of Gladstone and an Old Etonian. He married twice: first to a charming gal from the shires who knew all about him, but was killed in a car accident; second to Marion Stein, Viennese daughter of Webern’s favourite pianist, Erwin, who became Countess of Harewood, cousin by marriage of the Queen. When the forces of the law finally did take action, it stood little chance against these advantages. 
 This is a brilliant biography, and one of its most compelling aspects is the fascination it lends to the story of the Liberal party at a very dark time. At one moment, the entire parliamentary party could have fitted into a London taxi, and, as Bloch points out, all but one of those had won their seats because the Conservatives had not fought for them. Thorpe engineered a significant revival in the fortunes of the party, but even in 1967, he had the greatest difficulty in finding three people pre‑pared to accept a Liberal peerage. (One went to a donor, one to a rugby player and the third to a childhood friend of Thorpe’s after three other people had refused it.) 
 Bloch persuades us of the completely bizarre atmosphere in the party in this era. Ideologically incoherent, it included intellectual Labour-tending followers of Megan Lloyd George and Conservative-leaning followers of Violet Bonham Carter, as well as radical Young Liberals full of the spirit of the 1960s. With so few MPs, parliamentary spokesmen tended to speak up whenever they felt like it, and to address any subject they had a fancy for. The memory of the glory days was strong in some Liberals. When, in 1958, China and the US were coming close to war over two Taiwanese islands, the stand-off inspired the chair of the Liberal conference, Sir Alan Comyns Carr, to a sonorous contribution: “The eyes of the world are on us – I do not want to say anything which might exacerbate the situation in Quemoy and Matsu.” 
 Thorpe’s leadership coincided with something of a revival in votes, though perhaps not in professional standards, and by the 1970s, the party’s future no longer seemed in doubt. His showman-like qualities pulled in disenchanted voters, although the prospect in 1974 of entering into government, with all its difficulties and necessary compromises, dissolved the high-minded pretence like a meringue in a rainstorm. In the end, reading this astounding book, you have to conclude that Thorpe kept a rackety show on the road for so long in exactly the same way that Kim Philby, the Soviet spy and accessory to murder, did: by a very good performance of an old act, the confidence and smooth superiority of the old Etonian in charge of things. Thank goodness those days are long behind us. 
 
