The Liberal Democrat conference in Liverpool next week will be crowded out with delegates,journalists and visitors who will have very different motives for being there. Some will hope to see a massacre of Lib Dem aspirations to be a party of government, some will applaud the efforts of Lib Dem ministers. Few of the critics will acknowledge the central uncomfortable truth that under any UK government, including a Labour one, very large cuts in public expenditure would have had to be made. So the question isn't whether – it is what, when and how 
 So what does it take to make this coalition work? The agreement reached by the negotiators was an astonishing document, representing substantial concessions by the Conservatives and a readiness among the Lib Dem leadership to take on the responsibilities and the strains of sharing power. But understandably it left many important questions unsettled. The evident harmony between the respective leaders is helpful, but can also feed a sense that the leaders are out of touch with their more tribal activists. 
 Coalition brings political pain. Are the cuts going to push the country into a further recession? Is the OECD, the respected voice of the advanced industrialised economies, right to suggest that our proposed cuts in public expenditure should be moderated ? Is the further £4bn demanded by George Osborne, the chancellor, sensible at a time when unemployment is rising? In the United States job losses have undermined support for the once popular Obama administration. 
 Some of the coalition's Conservatives have their sacred cows. One of them is Trident like-for-like renewal. But the ruthless pressure of expenditure cuts brings mixed blessings. It may compel a postponement of the decision to start on renewal until after the next general election. That would save more than the £4bn the chancellor demands. It would also mean that the country could have the substantial debate we need, on what role we want to play in the world, on how to promote William Hague's foreign policy of much closer relationships to the newly emerging powers. Such relationships depend much more on upholding multilateral treaties and agreements, and supporting a more representative set of global decision makers at the UN and elsewhere, than on a throwback to the cold war concept of mutually assured destruction. 
 Are Andrew Lansley's proposals for a massive reorganisation of the NHS another Conservative sacred cow? I hope not. The NHS, much improved by Gordon Brown's injection of extra money last year, is now delivering outcomes as good as the best European health systems, and much cheaper than the private US health system. Modest changes are in order but wholesale transformation to a system run by reluctant and inexperienced GPs dependent on private advisers could split the coalition. 
 So, yes, the coalition has its problems. Some are dealt with by working together, learning from one another. Michael Gove's academies policy removes local government almost entirely from the education scene, and Lib Dem are gut localists who oppose that. 
 But Gove and his colleague Lord Hill have listened, worked their way through the issues with their Lib Dem associates and gone a long way to accommodate the needs of poor and disadvantaged children. On civil liberties, the rolling back of the surveillance state and criminal justice, the coalition has brought new thinking and new freedom. There has been a breakout from the sour assumption that nothing much can be done to build a more open society. Coalition is tough, but without parties working together, neither the economic crisis nor the loss of trust in parliament can be effectively addressed. 