In the debate after the budget in Parliament, David Cameron laid into Gordon Brown's economic record, his judgment and his case to lead the country for five more years. 
 "No one has yet thought of the question to which the answer is five more years of this prime minister," Cameron perorated, looking across the Commons as if expecting a blistered and withered husk to appear where only a moment before Brown had been sitting. 
 Politically, it is exactly the right line of attack. Even many tribally loyal Labour people struggle to muster active affection for the idea of a full-term of Gordon, especially when it would be Gordon II: The Revenge ("He's back from the dead … and this time he's got a mandate!"). In that movie, everyone who crossed Brown in the current cabinet, or even looked at him in a funny way in a Whitehall corridor, is butchered even before the opening credits. 
 But stylistically Cameron's jibe is a cliche. You can apply that rhetorical device to anything. What is the problem to which the solution is making David Cameron more smug? If Britain said "no" to William Hague in 2001, why ask again? If George Osborne has all the economic answers, why did the Tories have to ask Ken Clarke? What is the question to which the answer is "the post-bureaucratic age"? You see, anyone can play. 
 The implication of Cameron's attack is that the nation is crying out not for many answers, but for one big one. This is going to be a central theme of the Tory campaign. Team Dave believes that voters switch off when exposed to too much policy detail and instead want big themes writ large; clear choices. 
 That means framing the campaign with one overarching question. Ideally for Cameron, it would be something along the lines of: "We are in a great big hole; who will get us out of it?" The Tories then lead the electorate to the answer by insisting that Brown is disqualified, because he dug the hole in the first place. 
 Labour, meanwhile, hope the campaign will be summarised by a different question: "Can you really trust the Tories?" (Although they might dress it up a bit more positively than that, with a bit of: "Who made the right calls when economic Armageddon loomed?") 
 This game is hardest of all for the Liberal Democrats. What is the campaign question to which they are the answer? Traditionally, it has been: "I can't vote Labour, I hate the Tories, what should I do?" But fringe parties are cannibalising that vote. 
 What Nick Clegg really needs is a way of asking a big, fundamental question to which the answer is: "A hung parliament." He could try: "What do bankers least want to happen in the election?" Seen from that angle, a vote for the Lib Dems is a populist proposition. 
 This approach to politics – framing the problem with one guiding question – is a noble tradition that has sadly gone into decline. In 1863, the Russian radical Nikolai Chernychevsky wrote the novel What Is to be done? while imprisoned in St Petersburg. Good question! It became a founding text for utopian agitation. Lenin used the same title in a 1902 pamphlet calling for the formation of a vanguard party of working-class revolution. 
 But Lenin also coined an even more pertinent question to encapsulate ultra-leftist politics, and he did it in two words: "Who – whom?" In other words, life is a zero sum game. Either "they" are sticking it to "us" or "we" have to stick it to "them". 
 The last really good rhetorical question in politics was invited rather than posed. It was Kennedy's inaugural invitation to the US: "Ask not what your country can do for you – ask what you can do for your country." If JFK had been a Russian provocateur at the turn of the 20th century he might have written a pamphlet called: "What can I do?" 
 I suppose there is also a question implicit in Barack Obama's brilliant campaign slogan: "Yes we can!" Perhaps if Obama had spent his youth being persecuted by the Tsarist secret police he would have penned a tract under the simple title: "Can we?" 
 Britain, on the other hand, has a lame record of asking big, abstract political questions. The last person to try was Ted Heath. When, in 1974, his administration was paralysed by industrial action, he went to the country asking: "Who governs Britain?" The country famously replied: "Not you." 
 What is the question that would really capture the spirit of the coming election? There is a lot of argument over when to start cutting the deficit, but that's no use. History will not judge us kindly if we summarise our age with the question: "What is the optimal timing of a fiscal exit strategy?" Or: "How do you know when private sector demand has recovered enough to withdraw public sector stimulus?" 
 I suspect the big unanswered question arises not from the budget debate, at least not directly. It pertains to fundamental disillusionment with politics and politicians after the credit crunch and the expenses scandal. The fastest growing segments in most opinion polls are "other", "don't know" and "none of the above". 
 The question, then, is how to restore faith in politics itself. What would an imprisoned St Petersburg radical working by candlelight over a manifesto to address this problem use as a title? "Who cares?" 
 Or better still, the quintessential question of our times that expresses dismay at the state of the economy, society, politics, everything distilled not into two words – oh, how verbose Vladimir Ilyich! – but into just three characters: "WTF?" 