The ghosts of political giants such as JM Keynes and William Beveridge, David Lloyd George and Mr Micawber stalked the Commons as MPs quarrelled over the merits of the budget. Among these heroes of deficit spending, there was also a brief sighting of Gordon Brown. 
 About time too. At the start of question time, the former PM slipped on to the backbenches for the first time in 25 years and sat next to his burly minder, Tom "Oddjob" Watson. He chatted for all of two minutes and was gone. 
 Mercifully, attempts to body-snatch Keynes took place after Brown's departure and it was all the fault of Chris Huhne , who spoke as if he and Keynes were old drinking buddies. 
 The Lib Dem energy secretary and gossip column star was in the chamber to promote the green features of the Osborne budget. That left him time to kill, so Huhne also tried to explain why he has embraced Tory policies he attacked before polling day. 
 Uncle Vince Cable had been emollient and sorrowful when attempting the same maneouvre against Alistair Darling on Wednesday, but Huhne sought to outdo his erstwhile leadership rival, Nick Clegg. In a World Cup for patronising pomposity, Nick and Chris would already be through to the knock-out stages, at the top of their groups. 
 At least Huhne has an excuse: he is an economist – they cannot help themselves – and yesterday blamed his U-turn on "Greek contagion". What sounds like something British teenagers bring home from Crete is actually fear of sovereign debt, a threat that became apparent only when the prospect of office pulled the wool from Lib Dem eyes. 
 It meant Britain must slash its debts before it was mugged by the markets, explained Huhne, careful to use long words. "When the facts change, Sir, I change my mind. What do you do?" he quoted his hero , Keynes, as saying. To annoy Labour further, he also cited JK Galbraith ("another hero of mine") as certain to have backed the Osborne budget if he had not done the decent thing by the pensions deficit and died. 
 Huhne insisted that the Institute for Fiscal Studies supports the Huhne-Keynes thesis. As for Labour, its new guru was Mr Micawber, "hoping that something will turn up". Did they not realise they were talking to a man who has witnessed sovereign debt crises in person? "I was in Seoul in 1997, in Jakarta before the food riots, in Bangkok before the collapse of the Thai baht." Thai contagion? With that medical record, it is amazing Huhne is employable anywhere in the sterling area, let alone by a fragile coalition. 
 Ed Miliband's reply was less cerebral. The only fact that had changed Huhne's mind was a cabinet job, he argued, appealing to Simon Hughes to take up the mantle of "leftwing Lib Dem tribune" discarded by Huhne. Vote down the budget, cried Eddie. Hughes said he wouldn't, but you could tell he's warming to the idea.