Eureka! That alchemist Iain Duncan Smith has found the philosopher's stone, the holy grail of the great welfare conundrum. Ministers and MPs at the Conservative conference are sending out hallelujahs for his "revolutionary" welfare reform. Without understanding it at all, they assure everyone who will listen that a single, simple, no-losers, new "universal credit" will get swaths of the unemployed into work, save a fortune in benefits and purge fraud – just like that. It's an admirable aim but almost certainly a mirage. Meanwhile expect many more welfare cuts, an end to all universal benefits and the death of what little remains of Beveridge's national insurance idea. 
 Conservatives cutting the welfare bill is no surprise: an eye-catching cap of £26,000 in total benefits will exile larger poor families from places like Notting Hill. Clearances of the poor from all high-rent southeastern zones starts with the housing benefit cuts in April, when a mass migration of 100,000 compete for cheaper homes in distant places: even Boris Johnson objects. 
 But how odd that families with children have taken every hit so far. Maternity allowances, child tax credits, the baby bond, the three-year freeze in child benefit – all these cuts target children, points out Yvette Cooper, the shadow secretary for work and pensions. Now comes the end of the near-sacred universal child benefit: the old compact binding rich and poor alike into the welfare state. 
 Here ends the pro-natalist consensus, the national welcome to every new baby, rewarding all families for nurturing the next generation. In future, the well-off top 15% – as ever described by the Mail as the "middle class" – will have no common interest in the welfare system. It amounts to a tax rise of £2,500 for a high-earning family of three children. But why children? If Osborne wanted to tax the rich, why target only families with children instead of income tax falling on all equally? Yet Cameron carefully protected well-off pensioners' winter fuel payments and bus passes for the likes of me – presumably with an eye to the age profile of Conservative voters. 
 Child benefit will disappear altogether once IDS's new universal credit takes over. Did it really bind the better off into the welfare state? It certainly has now. Just listen to how quickly these families have grasped the unfairness of the whole social security system once universalism is abandoned. How can it be, they are asking suddenly, that they suffer this steep loss once either partner earns a penny over £43,875 – but not if each earns £43,874? Here comes their initiation into the world of means testing: that is what happens all through the benefits system among poorer claimants, with steep tapers and wicked disincentives to earn more. Listen to their complaint that a family with one earner on £44,000 in the south-east struggling with a high mortgage and steep commuting costs will suffer from this cut far more than an equivalent family in the cheaper north. Yes, indeed. 
 It is some of those perversities that IDS claims to have solved. After the bungling of every previous perplexed custodian from Peter Lilley, to John Hutton (now working for them) to James Purnell (no softy), he has fixed it all. Simple! He has converted an incomprehensible cat's cradle of 51 separate benefits into a single universal credit everyone can understand, where everyone will know what they are due, everyone will always be better off in work, it will be fair for all with no losers – and it won't break the bank. Incredible! 
 Truly, it is. There are no figures yet that prove dross has turned to gold, only the assertion. Ask the Institute for Fiscal Studies and they are unconvinced. At least one of these promises can't be true. Either the new system eventually cuts benefits steeply to create that extra work incentive – creating losers – or it will cost a fortune, beyond the institute's reckoning, to pay everyone more for working than they are currently paid. 
 Here's just one large bluebottle in the ointment. Consider the millions working for hardly more than they would get on benefits. Duncan Smith forgets the work ethic is infinitely more powerful than the urge to lounge and scrounge portrayed in occasional shocking media stories. Mike Brewer of the IFS says when lone parents were incentivised to work, for every one encouraged into a job, four already in work had to be paid extra. Consider that deadweight for the whole low-paid sector. 
 The Treasury is not stupid. Despite assertions that the new work programme will be so successful in getting people into work that it will save a fortune in benefits, the only affordable incentive will be to cut benefits. Ah! The "no losers" promise turns out to be for old claimants only – and even for them, for how long? Watch the wholesale downshift in benefits, on top of the 1% to 2% cut every year as payments now fall behind retail price index inflation. 
 Duncan Smith may honestly be trying his best, but there is a naivety about his boast, as if nobody had tussled with this over the years. Labour was just as eager to get people into work. He puts his faith in a vast new computer melding PAYE, credits and benefits by 2013: really? And even then his new universal credit is only a rebranding: claimants must still fill out a mile-long form, assessing entitlement to job seeker's allowance, employment and support allowance, child tax credits, working tax credits, childcare credits, disability allowances, housing benefits, council tax benefit – and more. 
 But there is one over-arching unreality: there are no jobs for most of the unemployed, nor any in prospect soon, according to the Office for Budget Responsibility. Long-term unemployment doubled in the last two years to 800,000, and there are five job seekers fighting for every vacancy. 
 This is only the start. The end of universal child benefit heralds the imminent demise of all other non-means-tested benefits. National insurance has long been a sham and a mystification to most people, confused about what entitlements it confers. Expect an end to unemployment benefit and sick pay as an automatic non-means tested right for all who pay NI, regardless of wealth. 
 The richest and oldest may think child benefit a pointless extravagance – but among those closer to the £44,000 line this may cause outrage. Some, like Barnardo's Martin Narey , writing in the Guardian yesterday, think child benefit should be redistributed to the poorest – but that is not the IDS plan. George Osborne may come to regret breaking this universal bond to save a paltry £1bn. 