So we've had the debate. What does it mean? Is it long-overdue jousting that cuts through the middle-men who pollute the relationship between politicians and the voting public? Was it precise, intricate discussion? Do we have to watch the other two, is what I'm asking. Or can we just say we watched the main one? 
 Of course Nick Clegg won, stupid. It's the Cinderella election. Just by looking like he might not get invited to the ball, he became the prettiest. Then he rammed this impression home by actually being the prettiest. There were probably mice and squirrels helping him get ready. 
 "His suit has a weird baggy area round his ankles," said my televisual companion. "Do you think he's carrying a gun?" A gun! That would liven things up a bit. Maybe at midnight it will turn back into a carrot. 
 It's very easy to be Clegg, though, isn't it? All you have to do is say the others are both finished, but in the unlikely event that they aren't, can't we all co-operate? You can be combative yet conciliatory, honest yet political, prime-ministerial yet… actually, he wasn't prime ministerial. I personally think prime-ministerialism is over-rated. You don't see athletes wandering around beforehand, practising how to look good in gold. They just win, and then the gold-wearing takes care of itself. 
 Everybody said this was going to be Cameron's night, because he's the best looking. Just as a week is a long time in politics, so a small amount of freshness is a lot of good looks. 
 I was surprised to find that I wasn't bored. Then I noticed how far in we were: 5 minutes and 40 seconds. I can watch an episode of Scrubs for that long without even noticing that I've seen it before, let alone remembering that I hate it. But I think part of the watchability was the slightly delicious pain, the embarrassment of watching people do rhetorical stunts that they read about in a book. It's just awful, isn't it? When people shake my hand and say "Hello Zoe" while looking me in the eye, I deliberately ruin this management trick for remembering names by shouting "Marjorie! Amanda! Steve!" 
 Anyway, there are different modules to this book-learning. It starts with body-language. They've all been warned off alienating gestures, such as crossing your arms, pointing, drinking your water and then accidentally snorting it out of your nose… all the things that normal people do. Regular bodily movements are totally off the table, and in their place comes a ballet of weird stuff. 
 Gordon Brown grabs an imaginary, asymmetrical ball; he does the Jockey (hands balled round pretend-reins, giddy up, we've nearly won! But only if everybody else falls over); and the non-praying prayer (hands joined, but instead of pointing upwards, towards God, they point outwards, towards you, the voter. Dear people, please vote for me, and my mummy and my daddy, and all the children who can't afford toys). David Cameron has the splay-fingered side-wave; the friendly fist ("I can make a fist, like a real man. But I promise not to hit you with it, I'm just going to move it up and down); and the hand-spread (I am so open, so decent, so honest, that I'm not even going to hide my palms, a man's most private fleshy area). Nick Clegg doesn't have to do any of this, he just has to not do anything that the other two are doing, and already he looks refreshingly like a human being. 
 Right. That's your body. Now let's concentrate on the words. Weighing it up, they spent about half an hour doing the "I met a young person in my Burnley constituency the other day…", "I met a man of middle-age in my very active chatting around the Reading area…" 
 This is more than unconvincing, it's frankly jarring. They all sound like cabbies. "I had that classic disaffected voter in the back of my cab, and he/she said to me, 'I'm disaffected!'" And then when they really get going, they sound like the beginning of a Victorian music hall act: "I met a lady in the park, she said she was a nurse! I gave her my particulars, she put them in her purse… Oooooh!" 
 I remember Tony Blair doing this in the 2005 party conference. I wonder if he wasn't the person who started it. He'd "met" a "five-year-old" who had told him that she finally set her "alarm clock" (whether she'd been lifted out of poverty, hence able to afford an alarm clock, or was the beneficiary of such an exciting school life that she suddenly wanted to get up in the morning, my memory doesn't relate). It's so bogus and unenlightening. Oh, except for David Cameron, who "met" a "forty-year-old black man" who'd been in the Navy for 30 years. Huh? A victim of Cameron's totally inept arithmetic, more like. 
 In the end, it wasn't that revealing. Gordon Brown essayed three jokes (one about Ashcroft, which was a joke car-crash: "It's not question time, it's answer time, now, David", which made my companion feel fondly about him because he grinned at the end, like "I did it! I didn't mess it up!") and overall seemed like a decent person, with his funny smile and big, red ears. 
 David Cameron is so well-spoken, isn't he? You'd think that would put people off. Wandering around, with his diction hanging out. He also had three jokes, sorry, points – first, that he wasn't going to raise NI contributions, and that money that he wasn't going to get, he intended to spend in the following ways (see? Can't count… ); second, that he would cut waste; third, that we all needed to "come together" (I'm trying to think of a practical application it might have in life, outside of an orgy or a maypole). 
 And Clegg. Ah… don't worry about your points. Try on my fancy slipper, Cleggerella! I'll be watching again just for him.