Westminster was woken from its summer slumber with something of a jolt by Nick Clegg's declaration that the Liberal Democrats would press for a temporary wealth tax. 
 The reverberations round the Westminster village, as Labour and the Tories poured scorn on the proposal, contrasted with Clegg's hushed tone when he dropped the first idea bombshell of the new political season. 
 The deputy prime minister was not signalling a covert plot as he spoke with barely more than a whisper in his Guardian interview on the 7.00am train from London to Newcastle on Tuesday. Clegg was simply concerned not to bother commuters who are often irritated when politicians use the chance of long train journeys to sound off to the media. 
 This did not stop inhabitants of the Westminster village from floating a series of theories about why the Liberal Democrat leader had chosen this moment to propose a "time limited contribution" from the richest in society. "What was that all about?" one senior Tory asked. "Has the deputy prime minister spent the summer reading up on new taxes?" 
 Clegg will at one level regard the fuss as absurd because he was stating the obvious: Liberals have for decades believed in focusing tax on wealth. In his interview he spoke of "an old Liberal idea that you should be rewarding initiative and hard work but you should be making people who have unearned wealth make a contribution". 
 But there are more immediate reasons why the deputy prime minister decided to make an announcement which led to what were described as "large raised eyebrows" in the Treasury. 
 First, he believes the Lib Dems need to go further in differentiating themselves from the Tories as all parties gear up for the 2015 general election. 
 In his interview Clegg said his party should "start spreading our wings more" as they look to a future when the Lib Dems will be "unencumbered and unrestrained by coalition". 
 The Lib Dems, under the guidance of their former strategy director Richard Reeves, have been planning for some time to take greater steps towards differentiating themselves from the Tories as the parliament reaches its mid-term this autumn. But this process has intensified after the failure this summer of David Cameron, in Lib Dem eyes, to deliver his side of the coalition agreement on reform of the House of Lords. 
 Clegg's second reason for floating a wealth tax was his concern that George Osborne is planning to target the poor after the chancellor said in the budget that an extra £10bn in welfare cuts may be introduced by 2016. Clegg accepts some cuts will have to be made to welfare. But he said in his interview: "That has to be done in a way which starts at the top rather than starts at the bottom." 
 The next step will come at the Lib Dem conference at the end of next month when the party considers a series of proposals for wealth taxes. Clegg was attempting to shape that debate when he floated the principle of a new wealth tax, rather than a specific proposal. 
 All sides are now spoiling for a fight. Lord Oakeshott, the former Lib Dem Treasury spokesman who is often critical of Clegg, is tabling an amendment that will name the mansion tax as the first wealth tax. 
 In the wings Osborne will monitor the debate with detached interest. The chancellor is dismissive of the Clegg proposal because he says the greatest contribution to his fiscal consolidation comes from the top 1% of earners, even measured as a share of their income. 
 There may well be blood on the floor as the two coalition parties do battle before the autumn spending review. 