So a miserable few days for Tony Blair but a slightly better time perhaps for Peter Brierley , the father of Lance Corporal Shaun Brierley, who died during the invasion of Iraq in March 2003. Blair, as we know, was scuppered in his attempt to become the EU president. Peter Brierley, we learn, can take some of the credit for that. Or depending on your view, some of the blame. For when he snubbed Blair at the Guildhall memorial event in October, his words to the former PM – "I'm not shaking your hand, you've got blood on it" – struck a chord with anti-war types here, but if anything they had a greater impact in Paris. According to senior government sources there, Nicolas Sarkozy told his staff the EU couldn't risk having a man as president who might be confronted with similar angry scenes. Three weeks later, on 28 October, Sarkozy – who initially supported the Blair candidacy – met Angela Merkel for dinner, where they agreed that it couldn't possibly be Blair. Both framed a variety of public arguments that undermined Blair's chances (we need a centre-right figure; Britain is not in the eurozone), but the genesis of Sarkozy's about-turn was that "blood on your hands" confrontation. "If that's the result, I'm pleased," Brierley told us yesterday. Words can be the most devastating weapon of all. 
 Still it wouldn't be right to say that the former PM has no friends. He has his lucrative commercial contacts and, judging by the rapturous reception he received at an investment conference in central London last week, he is something of a superstar in Sierra Leone. His father taught there and he sent the troops in to quell the fighting, and in the aftermath he has become a sort of unofficial ambassador. No presidential vacancy there: but if fate played its hand, he'd stand a chance. 
 So they're off, and have no doubt, the Iraq inquiry will be impartial, says its chair Sir John Chilcot. Teams of officials will help make it so. This is what they have done before. Six come from the Cabinet Office; four from the Ministry of Defence; three from the Foreign Office. One each from the Northern Ireland Office, the Serious Fraud Office, Government Communications Headquarters, and the Department for International Development. But never fear because two of the 19 are temporary staff engaged from outside government. They'll make the difference. 
 A trip to Birmingham for culture minister Margaret Hodge to announce that she will not be listing the city's central library , a concrete monstrosity from the 70s. Or a masterpiece, if you will. English Heritage did what it could, saying that the building received no awards when it opened because "the architectural profession had other things on its mind; like inflation, strikes and the recession", and that the library's sternest critic, Prince Charles, "cannot be considered an impartial architectural critic". But its bleatings cut no ice. 
 To the West Country, where ITV news presenter Lisa Aziz claims racial discrimination by her colleagues. Nothing is proven, all is denied. A tribunal will rule. But ITV reveals there have been repercussions, for "it is accepted that [co-presenter] Steve Scott regularly impersonates people within the office and he confirms the same. He strongly denies the accusation that he makes racist and demeaning remarks." As a result of ITV's investigation, says the official statement, "Steve has immediately ceased doing all impersonations of his own volition". It's news now. Just news. 
 Finally, with the government considering new restrictions on public smoking, a tale of how similar restrictions are working out in California. A young man is sitting on a park bench. He smokes one cigarette, then a second, then a third. An older man sitting opposite says: "Smoking that many cigarettes in the morning is very bad for you." Young man: "My grandfather lived to the age of 98." Older man: "Yes, but did he smoke three cigarettes in an hour?" Young man: "No – but he minded his own damned business." Giving up is making them irritable. So is carrying on. There really is no way out.