It's taken some time. But finally, thank god, I think my new girlfriend's best mates have realised I'm actually quite fun. The invitations are pouring in: a real achievement. It was hard for them to see past the Tory badge: a tad stiff and faux posh. But, after a few drinks, a bit of a groove and a little alcohol-induced soppiness over Katy, I've become their new best friend. Well, I hope so. 
 We Tories are often misunderstood. Many voters don't trust our motives, as in-depth polling in Lord Ashcroft's Project Blueprint has shown. Crucial floater voters who didn't go for us in 2010 say we don't stand for people like them and stick up for the rich and privileged. Care and compassion are lacking, apparently. Two years on and they still think that. That cherished Conservative majority is still far away. 
 The modernisation project was meant to change negative perceptions, to make people think twice about the Tory brand. Cue the big society and huskies. These weren't just presentational; they tapped into deeper, richer conservative sentiments about the importance of community, stewardship and love. Conservatives are not libertarian loners, obsessed only with Jaguars and spreadsheets. 
 But since the crash, deficit reduction has dominated. Liberal Democrats , determined not to be swallowed up and lose a purposeful identity, desperately portray themselves as the human brake on Tory excess. Sceptical voters stay away, unconvinced that our politics are motivated by hearts, rather than just heads. Tory modernisation needs a reboot. 
 So let's keep strong on plans to legalise same-sex marriage. Commitment to international aid, yes. Another push on greening the economy and extra focus on alleviating poverty, too. 
 These issues are vital, but not enough. Modernisation 2.0 needs to be broader. The Conservative offer also needs to speak to the strivers: those on modest incomes, struggling with inflation and spending for their children. Affordable homes, childcare, good schools and the cost of living: these are the issues where the party needs strong, identifiable policies. 
 So it's not soft social policy or dry economics, tough talk on crime, or respect and compassion for minorities: it's all of this. All of us are multiples, changeable with different sentiments at different times on different issues. To achieve progress, Conservatism is humble and aspires to work with human nature – unpredictable and malleable, rather than trying to construct the notion of a constant, idealised self fixed to one set of values: always selfish or always benign, for instance. 
 In our poll released today of those who voted Tory in 2010 and are supporters of the Bright Blue modernising project, there was a clear pro-business intuition: more involvement for the for-profit sector in schools, and greater cuts to tax and regulation for companies. But equally, there was also commanding support for the legalisation of same-sex marriage. The next generation of modernisers are calling for economic and social liberalism. They're commercially aware and also socially minded. 
 True "One Nation" politics is inclusive, welcoming diverse people and impulses. Ed Miliband's version, sadly, seems to be everyone apart from Tories and some Lib Dems. Not only is this immaturely tribal, it could be politically dangerous. Most in our poll believed we were heading for a hung parliament. Come 2015, cross-party working may be a necessity once again. Tories: think again, too. If we want a second term, we may have to go into another Coalition with the Liberal Democrats. 
 