It's an iron rule of British politics that the more a budget is cheered on the day, the worse it turns out to be. So this one must be awful. The Tories loved it. And the Lib Dems loved the bits they'll claim credit for. When George Osborne raised the lowest tax threshold, they flourished their order papers frantically. The poor sods, both waving and drowning. 
 It will also be known as the Wallace and Gromit budget. The chancellor announced that the film tax credit was to be extended to video games, animation and pricey TV programmes. This will have, he said, many advantages, supporting "brilliant video games" and stopping dramas such as Birdsong and Titanic being filmed, as they often are, in Hungary. (No doubt in this new world, what Hungarians regard as Sunday night fun, such as Sandor Hunyady's play Karryazo Asszonyok, will be filmed in Elstree.) 
 Osborne went on: "It is the determined policy of this government to keep Wallace and Gromit exactly where they are!" The Commons collapsed in manic laughter. Even the Wallace and Gromit he referred to, Eds Balls and Miliband, were obliged to smile – though nobody is sure which of them is which, and, on screen, which is the dog and which is the chap in the tank top. It's like Ant and Dec; people think they know, but they are often wrong. 
 It was also the "they shall grow not old" budget. Osborne didn't say that he was creaming £3.5bn in tax allowances off pensioners. But this doesn't matter, because the "state pension age is to keep pace with longevity". This is a brilliant stroke. Possibly Mr Osborne is hoping to raise the pension age by a year every 12 months, ending a huge drain on the Exchequer. 
 This is tied in with new long-term bonds by which the government will be able to borrow money for repayment in 50 years – or much longer – locking in low interest rates. 
 So when you leave university, you can buy a 75-year bond that will mature when you turn 95 or 96, the new pension age. And they say we're no good at joined-up government! 
 The budget was full of strange quirks, delivered in Mr Osborne's high-pitched and occasionally squeaky voice. As I may have said before, close your eyes and you could be listening to Ann Widdecombe, though her voice carries rather more authority. 
 Ministers have banged on about binge drinking for months, but there is to be no rise in alcohol tax. Did Eric Joyce go berserk in vain? Drinks may go up as part of the coming "alcohol strategy". This could involve a minimum price for booze. Some of us would prefer a maximum price, so we can drink Lafite with our hot paninis, though in a supermarket these may now be liable for VAT: "Chancellor backs tax, attacks snacks." Cigarettes are going up, but public schoolboys were always hard on fags. 
 There was also high praise for Boris Johnson as mayor of London. This translated as: "Keep Boris out of parliament, where he might stop me leading the Tory party!" Mr Osborne does not do subtle. 
 Throughout, Ed Balls (Gromit, probably) kept up a running commentary at anyone who would listen. I suspect he used as many words during the speech as the chancellor. But his rage was nothing compared with his leader, who went into a spasm of fury. Wallace concentrated almost entirely on the 5p cut in the top tax rate. The 14,000 people in Britain who earned £1m or more a year would each be richer by at least £40,000. It was the government's own bankers' bonus! Then he launched into manic pantomime. "Hands up in the cabinet if you get a benefit from the income tax cut! Come on!" It was Delia Smith crazed on the pitch at Norwich, Eric Joyce in the Strangers' Bar, without physical contact. 
 Nobody budged. "One more chance!" The cabinet sat morose and resentful. 
 "Well, it's good news for him!" he said, pointing wildly at the prime minister. "Now he can afford his own horse!" 