The theatre was extraordinary. St Vince came in and opened with: "Conference" – and then, to huge cheers – "no, sorry, comrades". The cheeky nod to the left set the tone for the wonderfully received speech that he went on to give. 
 He boasted of upsetting the Telegraph, unsettling tax dodgers and bringing about an outbreak of hysteria on the part of the CBI. With mock apology, he explained to the hall that he was here to account for his work in the coalition, work which was "not much fun". And where the hall clapped politely for Clegg (at least until the strictly scheduled ovation at the end), for Cable the delegates were bubbling over with warmth right from the very beginning. 
 It was the speech Clegg could and should have given, for Cable did not budge an inch from the agreed coalition policy. Indeed, he attacked Labour's deficit-denying, effectively making the case for cuts, but added the necessary caveats to achieve a measured tone that his leader abjectly failed to strike. He referred in coded terms to his plan to privatise Royal Mail, but sweetened the pill by arguing bankers were more damaging than Bob Crow. And he projected distinctive progressive values, by rejecting the idea that money measures what matters most, and arguing that the best graduates should not go into top City jobs, but do something more useful instead. 
 Above all he succeeded – where Clegg singularly failed – in showing the Lib Dem faithful how they can maintain their distinctive identity in the unfamiliar settings of coalition government. It is the thing they most fear losing, and the one way to protect it is to show that they can still fight on both fronts, as they always did before. 
 Cable did so by attacking the Conservatives on specifics such as inheritance tax, which Clegg did not do once. Most important of all he scotched those gathering rumours about electoral pacts with the Tories by stating that, "We went through a merger to found our party, and we'll never merge again". 
 It is a line Clegg could have delivered but again failed to do, at least in his set-piece speech. If the coming year proves choppy it could be an omission he will pay a heavy price for. Already much loved, Cable has this morning reminded his party of the leader that they could have won, had he only stood in 2007. 