The world's politest politician gave evidence today to the Commons committee on the constitution. Oliver Letwin is famous for having let a burglar into his house at 5am when the man knocked and said he needed a pee. I find this a touching story. It was a kindness, not a folly. After all, he didn't have a stripy shirt and a sack marked "swag". 
 Other politicians would have reacted differently. Gordon Brown might have told the chap that he intended to set up a commission to investigate access to lavatories throughout Britain – then shut the door. Tony Blair would have produced verbless sentences: "Our people. Our bladders. Emptied at the point of need." And shut the door. Margaret Thatcher would have remarked that any man over the age of 30 not in possession of his own lavatory was a failure. And called the police. But Letwin let him in. 
 At one point in today's session, the historian Tristram Hunt, the new Labour MP for Stoke Central, gazed at him wonderingly and said: "You would make a terrible poker player!" Of course he was right. Letwin would think it deeply dishonest to win a hand when his opponent had the better cards. 
 He had been summoned to talk about the coalition talks in May. He was an important member of the Tory team, though not – according to him – that important. "I'm not a person who spends a lot of time gossiping in corridors; I am the last person to find things out," he said, perhaps accurately. 
 He hates confrontation. Having said that the coalition had to be formed in a hurry because the economy was in danger of collapse, he was challenged by a Labour MP who said that was his view, not shared by everyone in the room. He looked appalled at the very thought that he might ever dream of speaking for anyone else. "No, er, I am not for one moment suggesting …" 
 He uses language unlike any other politician. There were "crunchy" issues, which meant not Toffee Crisp problems but difficult points of argument. Someone asked about the House of Lords. He replied: "I am not an expert on the arcana imperii of the House of Lords," as if it were as natural as asking for a pint and a bag of crunchy scratchings. 
 Had he read the opposing parties' policy statements and manifestos? He had, and how. He resembled a trainspotter at Crewe. "I am a complete anorak," he said, almost joyously. Hunt asked whether he knew that the Lib Dems had dissembled somewhat, persuading the Tories that Labour had offered them a better deal on alternative voting than they actually had. Letwin looked shocked at this revelation of duplicity, much as he must have done when the mystery micturator started riffling through his belongings. 
 He praised the way the negotiators had kept their talks entirely confidential. But "the final product of the intercourse was entirely public!" he added. I know of no other politician who could utter that sentence.