Ed Balls was in Soulmates mood. People rightly want to know what sort of person I am, he confided. So he told them. “I am a realist and an optimist. I don’t believe in ducking difficult decisions. That’s who I am.” He could have added, “I can be a bit clumsy, I get angry too quickly and I don’t have much of a sense of humour if the jokes in this speech are any guide. I am inexperienced with handling large sums of money and am looking for a sensitive economy that has been badly hurt by its previous partner for a long-term relationship.” 
 Balls came to the Labour party conference platform with a variety of concrete measures, including cutting ministerial pay, increasing the highest rate of tax and introducing a mansion tax. But these were really all just window dressing for his real message of letting the world see the real Ed Balls. Not the media Ed who knocks people over on the football pitch and helped run the economy into the ditch, but the more sensitive Ed within. The Ed who knows he’s done bad things in the past and just wants a second chance. The Ed who knows it doesn’t matter how many bright ideas he’s got for the economy, there will always be those who think he’s more of a liability than George Osborne. The Ed who wants your trust. 
 “It’s more important than ever that we are honest with the country about what we got right and wrong,” he said. “While it was the banks which caused the global recession, and it was the global recession which caused deficits to rise here in Britain … the truth is we should have regulated those banks in a tougher way. It was a mistake. We should apologise for it. And I do.” As he reached “I do” he tore off his jacket and shirt and flagellated himself. “To – thrash – show – thrash – how – thrash – much – I’ve – thrash – changed – I’m – thrash – going – thrash – to – have – thrash – all – thrash – my – thrash – figures – thrash – audited – by – thrash – the – thrash – Office – for – thrash – Budget – thrash – Responsibility.” There we had it. A chancellor who was giving himself an Asbo and allowing himself out on probation. It could be a vote winner. 
 The chancellor who was actually in charge when Britain went into financial meltdown later got a mini-ovation for his efforts in saving the union. Though not as big a one as the chancellor before him who failed to regulate the banks and wasn’t even in the hall. Poor old Alistair Darling. Overshadowed by Gordon Brown to the very end. At least he won’t ever have to see him again. 
 In deference to Darling’s feelings, Ed Miliband didn’t bother to mention Brown in his final thank you to Labour’s Scottish team. Though the bus driver and the toilet attendant were name-checked. Nor did he use the occasion to mention constitutional reform. It must have just slipped his mind. Anyone would think Scotland was a distant memory. Instead he stood sheepishly in the middle of the stage while Sham 69, a 70s punk band with a strong NF following, played over the sound system. Better Together, Oi, Oi, Oi. Tomorrow the Clash and White Riot.