For the political tribe, primitive in their ways, the moment on election night when the clock strikes 10 is one of urgent, almost physical intensity. They watch as the tribal high priest – David Dimbleby – holds up the numbers of the exit poll, as if displaying the entrails of a freshly slaughtered goat. The tribesmen – the politicians and those who follow them – gather round to stare, analyse and interpret. 
 Tonight the poll delivered news that confirmed some expectations – and offered one shock prediction of such surprise, it cast doubt on the credibility of the entire exercise. 
 The exit poll forecast of a hung parliament, with the Tories as the largest single party, was in tune with what most Westminster villagers had anticipated. The twist came in the BBC projection that the Liberal Democrats would suffer a fall in seats to 59, three fewer than they held in the last parliament. Could that really be so? 
 Could the Cleggmania bubble have burst so brutally that it actually saw his party fall back rather than surging? 
 Even Dimbleby, the grand witchdoctor himself, seemed doubtful. At the very least, his findings meant a long night stretching into morning, waiting not for the calculations of a computer model but for actual results: the word of the people. 
 Before 10pm, the tribe had had to make do with lesser auguries. At the start of the day, they had gazed at the sky in search of clues. Where the sun was shining, perhaps that was a sign: the ancient wisdom of the clan held that good weather favoured Labour, since those voters on lower incomes, without a car, would be deterred by rain. 
 Sure enough, there came word of increased turnout. There were queues outside some polling stations, clerks reporting heavier than usual business at others. 
 The Twittersphere hummed with the suggestion that something was happening. But what? 
 Labour optimists guessed they were the beneficiaries. After all, that's what a high turnout usually means. But what if this year was different? Some said that the extra surge had come from young voters, particularly heavy in student seats. That surely meant a boom for the Liberal Democrats, a sign that Nick Clegg had not only drawn previously unenthusiastic youth to his campaign but had also succeeded in dragging them to the polls. 
 If that was right, that might mean a bumper crop of Lib Dem seats or, perhaps more likely, it might simply split the anti-Tory vote, damage Labour and help the Conservatives. Or maybe it meant the opposite. 
 It went on like that for hours: the obsessives trading rumour, hunches and gut feelings. Others chose to put aside speculation in favour of conspiracy. 
 For Labour, that meant predictable talk of the leadership. "How bad would it have to be for Gordon to go right away? Would he try to hang on? Would he announce he was stepping down – but not just yet?" 
 Other Labour folk, letting their voices drop to a whisper, began to talk of life after Gordon: who would be the runners and riders? Would Ed Balls be in Westminster to take his place among them? You couldn't find many – or any – Labourites who considered that the party would squeak a win. 
 As for the Tories, they didn't quite know what expression to wear. Once the exit poll came through, they weren't sure if they were meant to celebrate the prediction that they would replace Labour as the largest party in parliament – or weep that they had not won an outright majority, despite facing a government that was 13 years old and headed by a hugely unpopular prime minister. 
 If the tribe yearned for clarity, their high priest had disappointed them.