The day the prime minister makes his junior appointments is a stressful time for the the police on duty at the Downing Street gates. They don’t want to appear rude, but they haven’t a clue who most of the new faces are. All they have to go on is a series of blurred mug shots that were hastily printed out for them a few minutes earlier. 
 Further down Whitehall, husband and wife Tory MPs Caroline Dinenage and Mark Lancaster are holding hands. Until they spot a press photographer, at which point their hands part. There are protocols expected of MPs who are walking to Downing Street to be rewarded with new jobs – Caroline is now minister for equalities, despite being opposed to gay marriage, and Mark is junior defence minister – and public displays of affection are not one of them. 
 Then come the old lags. Having surprised himself by winning an overall majority, David Cameron has found himself with rather more largesse to dispense than expected. The only real casualties have been Grant Shapps and Eric Pickles. Others who might have been preparing for the dreaded move sideways or downwards now find themselves with a reprieve. Iain Duncan Smith’s reward for having turned the rollout of his universal credit welfare reforms into an unmitigated disaster, has been to be re-appointed as minister for work and pensions. He was doing his best to look as if he had been expecting nothing else. Fortunately, smugness is one of the expressions that comes most naturally to IDS. 
 Theresa May was the only minister to insist on her car being driven right to No 10’s door. Others were happy to be dropped off just inside the Downing Street gates and enjoy the 100 metre walk. At one stage, the concentration of black limos was so severe, Downing Street looked in danger of gridlock. The transport minister, Patrick McLoughlin, had to be called out to direct operations. In time, the drivers will get better at timing their drop-offs. A rogue blue Kia also made it through the gates, though no one got out of it. Perhaps the passenger had looked a bit like Greg Clark, the new communities minister, a man so nondescript he can barely recognise himself, and the police had let it in by mistake. 
 The new business secretary, Sajid Javid, walked in alongside John Whittingdale, the man who has inherited his old job as culture secretary. Whittingdale is believed to have the BBC in his sights. The BBC certainly had him in theirs, though no words were exchanged between them. But if cameras could kill... 
 Philip Hammond brought up the rear. His role as foreign secretary is to be so dull that he promotes peace through world sleep. It’s a policy so effective, it must have even worked on himself this morning. 
 With everyone finally inside No 10, the cameras were allowed in for a few minutes to capture everyone looking jolly and thumping the crowded cabinet table when the prime minister walked in. “We are going to be a blue-collar Conservative government,” Cameron announced, much to the surprise of many of the cabinet, most of whom wouldn’t be seen dead in anything so d&eacute;class&eacute; and wouldn’t be seen dead out in anything but the whitest of white. Perhaps a Davian very pale blue would do. Shirt catalogues from Pink and TM Lewin were discreetly handed out to the male cabinet members. 
 “It is absolutely vital that every decision we take, every policy we pursue, every programme we start, is about giving everyone in our country the best chance of living a fulfilling and good life,” Dave said. “And now it’s time for the cameras to leave.” And for the cuts to begin. 
