It is morning in Hendon, and someone has ordered the full Boris Johnson. “There is Alex Salmond,” toots the London mayor and Conservative candidate for Uxbridge, “with his feet on the desk in Ed Miliband’s office, holding his glass out for more champagne! Pink champagne, paid for by the English taxpayer!” 
 Such forces of darkness must not be allowed to ruin the restorative work of the Tories. After all, cranes were now dotting the London skyline “like some speeded-up Walt Disney film about the return of spring to the Canadian tundra!” And Britain is doing a roaring trade. “Assisted by George Osborne’s tax breaks, we even at one stage succeeded in exporting Russell Brand to America. Unfortunately, he seems to have mysteriously returned.” 
 An audience of captive workers was laughing, and David Cameron was laughing with a slightly clenched jaw. Whether the PM and Johnson ever really liked each other, even in the Bullingdon days, has always seemed doubtful. Either way, they now embody the least convincing relationship of mutual reverence since that between Alex Ferguson and Jose Mourinho. 
 “I tell you folks,” Boris confided in his audience. “Never have I been so worried about what could happen under Labour.” Totally. He’s so worried that he’s stayed conspicuously out of the Tories’ lacklustre national campaign, like a man who knows he’d lose a quarter of his value just driving out of the showroom. Still, when absolutely pushed, he’ll pull a Christopher Walken, aping the actor’s habit of showing up for a three-minute cameo and stealing the show. 
 Tuesday morning once again found Cameron as the unfortunately eclipsed lead actor, forced to watch his possible successor chewing up the scenery. The venue was another hermetically sealed business space. Just a theory, but is there a possibility that UK productivity growth is low because Cameron brings a couple of business parks a day to a standstill so he can stage election events in them? Here it was workers for an energy provider being kept from their day jobs, making the PM not the only salesman in the room who wasn’t likely to hit his targets. 
 Still, he definitely didn’t want to talk about the legitimacy questions that might arise in the event of a hung parliament. “I’m not in the predictions business,” he stated. He wasn’t going to get into the what-ifs and wherefores and what might happen on Friday.” But if you want predictions about how the next five years would look under either a Tory or Labour government, he can definitely do you that, with a chaser of as many what-ifs and wherefores and what-might-happens as you like. 
 Mainly, though, it was just so great to be there with his friend Boris, Cameron enthused, who was making a thrilling return to parliament to be on his team again. “I want to have the star players on the pitch,” explained the Guv’nor, as no one in the Tory dressing room calls him. 
 While we’re on the subject of locker-room horseplay, though, could there please – in the name of all that is decent – be a moratorium on politicians making jokes about sexy time? In Hendon, Cameron was reiterating that to vote for Ukip is to “go to bed with Nigel Farage and wake up with Ed Miliband. I don’t know about you,” he twinkled suggestively to the audience, “but no part of that works for me”. Last week it was Ed Miliband referring to the idea of having to go into a “darkened room” with Nick Clegg, telling the Question Time audience: “I don’t like the sound of that,” he oo-erred, “for a whole range of reasons”. 
 Guys, guys … Please. We get it. YOU’RE ALL STRAIGHT. You’re not mining some comic seam here – you’re doing the equivalent of going into the gents’ and writing “NIJEL FARRARGE DONE IT WITH NICK CLEG!!!!!” on the wall. 
 As for questions from the floor, there were a rare couple of curve balls. One woman had a different take on the old “in this together” line, suggesting that Cameron, Boris, and George Osborne were in some slightly hard-to-follow banking family conspiracy, as well as all having been in the same class at school. 
 Disappointingly, Cameron declined to answer: “Don’t be absurd, madam. Boris was in D block while I was still in F block. And Osborne only went to St Paul’s, which is why his Bullingdon nickname was “Oik ”. Instead, the PM claimed: “It’s good to have lively questions!”, like someone who hasn’t just spent the past five-and -a-half weeks avoiding voters in cowsheds and on sterilised factory floors. 
 Good to have them, but not to answer them, going by his non-sequitur response to “judge us on our record”. Boris was more forthcoming: “I did go to the same school as the party leader. I also went to the same primary school as Ed Miliband. You might as well ask about the sinister grip of Primrose Hill primary school on British politics.” 
 After the event, I noticed the woman who had asked this question having a rather agitated conversation, inquiring of someone who appeared to be a superior. “Are you saying my job is at threat for this?” 
 As for the man whose job is most pressingly under threat, you may care to know that he continues to telegraph where he’s at via his clothing. Yes, David Cameron would like you to see that he has literally rolled his sleeves up. Meanwhile, Ed Miliband has literally set his policies in stone. Let 2015 go down as the election that killed metaphor, one sledgehammer blow at a time. 
