Lying on military camp beds in a cavernous C-17 flying from London to Afghanistan's Camp Bastion at the weekend, a joke ran round the plane that one journalist woke to see the prime minister looming over him, picking his way in his socks past sleeping bodies to see an aide. Seeing the reporter awake, Cameron paused to ask how his trip had been so far. "How is it for you?" the PM asked over the deafening engine noise in the depths of the 10-hour flight, adding: "I'm sleeping with the head of the army." 
 However, the Cameroonian gag machine was somewhat wasted up in the VIP cabin, a tiny private room behind the pilots and away from the plane's whale-like cavity filled with sleeping No 10 aides and journalists. Chasteningly, the aircraft is much more frequently operated as an intensive care unit to fly home severely injured soldiers from battle. It also repatriates the dead, flights with coffins that feel "like driving to a family funeral" one of the crew said. 
 Of course Cameron and the chief of the defence staff, General Sir David Richards , weren't in the same bed – the prime ministerial desert uniform of black jeans and navy shirt was clearly present in the top of two very separate bunks. But the pair are engaged in a complex act of public bunking up. They both believe the relationship between the prime minister and chief of the defence staff to be in need of repair. 
 There are public outbursts by Richards, and some salvos fired back by Cameron ("you do the fighting, I'll do the talking"). Richards appears to be the more loquacious by nature, but also he finds merit in being so. Friends say there is actually a desire deep down to make it work. 
 The pair were on their way to tell the troops of the beginning of the end of their war in Afghanistan; fighting troops all out by 2014, the year before a general election, Britain following America's lead. Some think that Cameron went to announce the first "drawdown" of frontline troops in the summer of 2012, but after the shocking death of 20-year-old squaddie Scott McLaren just as he touched down, he thought again. 
 Cameron had been due to announce 500 frontline troops out next summer, but after the mystery disappearance of Scott, he appeared chastened and this morphed into "by the end of next year". 
 The other thing became the language of "two fighting seasons". Lt-Gen James Bucknall (the most senior officer in Afghanistan) had said troop numbers should be not be eaten into before this and next summer were out. By teatime on his first day in Camp Bastion and after the disappearance of McLaren, Cameron was pledging just that. Richards himself was seen to have grinned broadly when it was suggested to him he had "won". 
 Friends in the large Richards circle say that was not so: 500 troops were always coming out in that time frame, and that, while the specifics of what-and-when will of course move, the topline withdrawal by 2014 remains. It seems Cameron's team probably were beaten back on the exact 2012 time frame. 
 But Cameron was nonetheless presented with reasons to be cheerful. Violent incidences are down 40%, he relayed. There is now a postal service between Marjah and Lashkar Gah in central Helmand. A taxi between those two cities used to take six hours, but now takes 40 minutes and costs $3.50. Saffron growing is on the rise and opium production is, according to Lt-Col Charles Page, down by 37% – something "he" (they don't call them the Taliban but the insurgency, and often just "he") used to tax. As a result, "he" is now scouting around "desperate" for other revenue. 
 It is to this that they attribute some recent deaths – the murder of a family on Highway 9 was an example of mindless lashing out rather than strategy. The skills of the Afghan army and police, now numbering 370,000, will only improve once the British step back and assume a "light touch" role. The recent attack on the Inter-Continental hotel in Kabul - held up as an example of something the Afghans need to be able to deal with themselves if they are really standing on their own two feet - was an unfair stick with which to beat the local forces. Such an assault, the military insisted, would have been complex to fend off in any country. 
 Then put all this through a glass darkly. To some the Taliban are biding their time, and Cameron has handed them a date of 2014 when they can return fighting. Some are withering about the Afghan police and army. "They win on numbers," one British official said. "Sheer size. Not skill." Another said: "They are [now] as good as they are going to get." 
 Crucially, they say, the Afghan army and police have "no common sense". "Take a check point on the road. When they check a car, they don't take it over to one side and let other cars go through but they check it there and then. A jam builds up, and soon you have bad temper and problems back further down the line." 
 This charge sheet will lose the PM only so much sleep; there may be postal services and $3.50 taxi rates, but he said this week his goal was not a "perfect country or perfect democracy". Added to which there will still be British forces abroad, just not fighting, possibly indefinitely. 
 That said, the prime minister is groping for foreign policy coherence, and in this Richards appears in the same bunk. Cameron helped ensure a settlement in the recent strategic defence review that rewarded hefty chunks to the army and less to the navy and airforce, despite the fact there is not a single boot on the ground in the other war in Libya. 
 Friends say Cameron is invested in Richards because he does not want to have split and left Afghanistan in the mire. Richards also does not want to be chalked up as "old military", fighting the big unwieldy wars rather than the just-as-tricky but more nimble Libya style wars (Richards is apparently not keen on Libya, but then few have been). 
 Richards made his name intervening in Sierra Leone (there's a statue to him there), and it is lodged in his psyche. That intervention was meant to be a new type of warfare, and Richards wants to make sure it can be fought again, both militarily and politically. But he knows that such an ambition requires leaving Afghanistan in good order.