The brutal business of leaving Downing Street takes prime ministers differently. Some slink away behind the removal vans. Margaret Thatcher could not check a rare public tear, while Tony Blair treated himself to a six-month lap of honour. A touch awkwardly tonight, Gordon Brown showed how much, beneath that dour exterior, he loves his wife and children. 
 Voters who did not cast their votes for Brown last Thursday may be glad for the outgoing prime minister, who has always looked like a solitary man in need of comfort. Never more than now. Forced out by Nick Clegg's deal with David Cameron he went straight to the palace, kids in tow, to offer up the seals of office – and resigned as Labour leader too – "immediately". 
 No hanging around for Brown, no lap of honour, no police outriders on the trip from Buck House to ritual embraces at Labour HQ in nearby Victoria Street. The audience lasted 20 minutes. 
 It was all over so quickly. Even in the Strangers bar of the House of Commons, its regulars hard-bitten political pros, there was silence followed by cross-party applause. 
 After what felt like an indecently short interval – the Queen's gilt chairs still warm – David and Samantha Cameron's limousine was heading up the Mall. An Old Etonian was kissing the royal hand (only metaphorically these days) to form an administration for the first time since (three OEs in a row) Sir Alex Douglas-Home in 1963 – three years before the new prime minister was born. 
 In the mellow sunlight the TV cameras showed an evening rainbow over the palace: the ancient symbol of life's renewal under a new government, or a teasing reminder of Labour's dashed hopes of a rainbow coalition? 
 Rumour had it that the timetable was speeded up because twitchy financial markets, restless for another target now that the eurozone has put €500bn behind Greece, needed an early end to uncertainty. More prosaically, it was said, the Queen does not change governments after 10pm. Unlike the NHS she does not have a GP locum or an 0845 number for Monarchy Direct. 
 Brown's statement had been typical of this contradictory man, both selfless and self-centred, tender and curiously masochistic. He did not admit that Labour had failed to create a rainbow coalition since Thursday's defeat, only that he wanted "strong, stable and principled government" to endure. 
 "My constitutional duty is to make sure a government can be formed …" 
 It followed that he would advise the Queen to invite the leader of the opposition – no name – to form one and to wish him well. "Only those that have held the office of prime minister can understand the full weight of its responsibilities and its great capacity for good. 
 "I have been privileged to learn much about the very best in human nature and a fair amount too about its frailties, including my own," Brown added, though by now the admission is unnecessary. "Above all, it was a privilege to serve. And yes, I loved the job not for its prestige, its titles and its ceremony – which I do not love at all. 
 "No, I loved the job for its potential to make this country I love fairer, more tolerant, more green, more democratic, more prosperous and more just – truly a greater Britain." 
 It was all very Gordon, the man who for years refused to wear tails and white tie to City dinners but was desperate to be prime minister, willing to torment Tony Blair until his final days in office. 
 Two years and 10 months in No 10 were his eventual reward, Labour's shortest premiership, two months shy of Jim Callaghan's, another fag-end premiership in economic hard times. 
 Brown's claim to the nation's gratitude rests on his rescue package for the stricken banking system when the western economies wobbled and others hesitated in October 2008. He alluded to that too, more surprisingly to the courage and sacrifices of the armed forces who, frustrated admirals and generals insist, he too often neglected in office. 
 At the microphone in Downing Street Sarah Brown was at his side throughout, soberly dressed in blue. "Above all, I want to thank Sarah for her unwavering support as well as her love, and for her own service to our country," Brown said in conclusion. "I thank my sons John and Fraser for the love and joy they bring to our lives. And as I leave the second most important job I could ever hold, I cherish even more the first – as a husband and father. Thank you and goodbye." 
 With that the door opened and Fraser and John appeared. What will they make of the photos in years to come? Hand in hand the family walked to the car. It is not how the reticent Baldwins, Attlees or Macmillans would have done it. But Britain now lives in the post-Diana era. 
 The Camerons were at the palace for 25 minutes, more socially at ease than the Browns. 
 The blood of long-dead royal bastards runs through Sam and David's veins and the new PM was at prep school with Prince Edward; Harold Rabbit to the prince's Mole in the 1975 school play. Sam Cam – and her bump – also wore blue, a darker shade. 
 It would be trite to suggest the new premier's arrival at No 10 was comparable to the Blairs' entry in 1997. Night had fallen and times are harder. But a menacing cloud lifted shortly before he got out of the silver Jag at 8.38pm. 
 The crowd cheered (and jeered) as Cameron began: "Her Majesty the Queen has asked me to form a new government …" 
 Over at Labour HQ Brown had thanked everyone on the team and lapsed into a partisan defence of New Labour's record and achievement – "more prosperous and more just" – the implication hanging on every word that his audience should now prepare for much worse. 
 Cameron pulled a classier stroke: he praised New Labour's 13-year achievements. Britain is "more open at home and more compassionate abroad. And that is something we should all be grateful for," he told watching viewers on TV who – Tory as much as Labour – do not yet trust him. He did not pander to the restless right. Cameron's hand shook slightly and, after six minutes, he kissed his wife and went to work. 
 His future is clear, as is his coalition partner, Nick Clegg's. They must tackle the worst debt mountain in postwar history and will be judged on their success. 
 As he flew home to Fife Brown's future is cloudier. 
 He will resign as an MP – the modern fashion – and has sufficient international standing to get a big job, probably in tackling global poverty, the passion he acquired from the David Livingstone stories of his Presbyterian childhood. First, he must rest and come to terms with his own record. It's over.