By Tuesday, even Nick Clegg had caught up with Tory HQ's Labour-baiting script and was abusing Unite's Len McCluskey. But who needs a respectable trade union apparatchik when they can have the Co-op's Crystal Methodist banker, Paul Flowers, to wrap round Ed Miliband's neck? 
 At the start of PMQs, it took no longer than David Cameron needed to eulogise another soldier killed in Afghanistan before the barrage began. Backbencher Steve Brine obligingly deplored the "nightmare" whereby such a dozy cleric had ever become chairman of a bank. Could the PM investigate? 
 Clearly young Brine has been asleep since 2008's bank crash, which revealed that assorted Moonies, Tory card sharps and Doctor Who fans had chaired much bigger banks where they failed to spot risks that cost taxpayers billions. Cameron obviously overlooked it, too. 
 Crocodile tears cascaded down those rosy cheeks. He promised an inquiry and appealed to anyone who knew the Rev's little weaknesses – I mean you, Edward Miliband – to tell the authorities. The jaw-dropping hypocrisy was magnificent, and Tory MPs loved it. 
 Never mind that the coalition encouraged Co-op bankers to expand while regulators slept, perhaps on the same sofa as Dave and Steve Brine. Were there not photos proving that the cokehead cleric and rent boy fiddler gave Labour money the Co-op couldn't afford? That he met Miliband at parties (though not – you can't have everything – with rent boys)? 
 At this point the Labour leader had two options: to remind the PM of some dodgy Tory (and fragrant Lib Dem) donors, or to raise the threat to childcare in Cameron country, Chipping Norton, currently white-collar crime centre of the south-East. He chose the latter. In fairness to Cameron, he defended his childcare policies until the strain proved too much and he likened Labour's childcare plans to "a night out with Rev Flowers". 
 Depraved clergymen are the stuff of British comedy, so they had to laugh. Mr Speaker had to calm them down. Miliband then blasted ministers with a sample of tainted Tory donors before playing his day's ace: Nick Boles. Had not the brainy Cameron groupie just denounced his own side as "the party of the rich"? 
 Cameron was as keen to talk about Boles as Miliband had been to discuss Crystal Methodism and whether or not John Wesley ever did stuff. He did not quite accuse the Labour leader of devouring lines of coke (and rent boys) with the entire Co-op board. Flowers had "trooped in and out of Downing Street", unfit and uninvestigated. Gross exaggeration, especially from a leader whose own unvetted No 10 intimates and Chipping Norton pals are currently sub judice. That's what Miliband must have meant when he called Dave's dodgy dozen "just the people I can talk about". 
 Cameron then fell back on Ed Balls, to whom Miliband had referred (actually, he hadn't) as a nightmare. "I told you so," said Dave. Miliband repeated Boles's fears that voters don't trust the Cameroons. Slow on the uptake, a Tory MP raised yesterday's pantomime villain, McCluskey. Dave obliged. 
 It was all in danger of getting sensible when Michael Meacher intervened. The steam-powered leftwinger had read somewhere that UK business investment lagged behind Mali and Paraguay. If you can believe that, you can believe anything. Meacher does. Cameron's contempt was understandable, but unwise. The MP sounded as if he'd been "out on the town with Rev Flowers and that mind-altering substances have taken effect", he joked. 
 At the session's end, MP Meacher solemnly protested that he had been accused of substance abuse. Angela ("Calm down, dear") Eagle cried "You're a bully", several times. 
 Cameron half apologised for his "light-hearted remark" and appealed for a cross-party sense of humour. Labour remained a cross party, though it well knows that Meacher has inhaled nothing more mind-altering than Tony Benn's diaries.