'Stairs or lift? I'd recommend the stairs," said the nice chap tasked with directing journalists to the gallery at Westminster Central Hall. "The lift is very slow. Plus, there's a bit of a wait." To the Ukip party conference, where the ties are exuberant, the thinking is free, and progress in the corridors is slow, occasionally stationary, thanks to a preponderance of walking sticks and an average age that makes Nigel Farage , the 49-year-old party leader, look like an impish school prefect expressing distastefully rightwing opinions purely to wind up his teachers. 
 It's been two decades since the party was founded and the motto on the main stage declared "20 years ahead", though in the usual manner of party conference slogans it didn't say of or to what, nor was it clear why the anniversary logo has the party's distinctive pound sign inside a yellow 50p piece. Above the logo it said "ready for another score". I think the drug reference was accidental, though with a bunch of thinkers this free one can never be too sure. 
 It's easy to mock Ukip, but of course they really rather like it. "We've been roundly abused, laughed at, mocked and derided!" an almost gleeful Farage told his conference audience as he opened his leader's speech, having bounded on stage to a booming clip of techno music so loud that even those without hearing aids were a little startled. "But we've changed the face of British politics!" 
 He has a point. David Cameron no longer refers to Ukip members as "fruitcakes and loonies and closet racists"; Tory party membership has fallen by almost half to 130,000 since Cameron became leader while Ukip's, Farage said, is now 30,000 and growing ("We're delighted! [The other parties] are appalled! The commentators are amazed!"). 
 Ukip's free thinkers "stand up and tells it how it is!" declared Farage. Hell, "Ukip is the most independent-minded group of men and women that have ever come together in the name of British politics!" "Hooray!" shouted an elderly woman somewhere behind my head. 
 There was certainly a lack of self-consciousness among delegates about expressing somewhat niche viewpoints that, compared with the carefully stage-managed messages of the major parties, was almost refreshing. 
 "The situation in the UK is basically moral decadence," said a thoughtful Ulsterman from Christian Soldiers for Ukip ("Fighting through Christ for deliverance from EU tyranny"), who had joined the party over its opposition to gay marriage. At a lunchtime fringe event on "Female Genital Mutilation: The Abuse that goes Unpunished", the first question was "Why are leftwing liberals so keen to see these girls sliced up?" 
 Making an unbilled appearance at a fringe event over lunch to discuss women in politics, the party's self-styled free thinker par excellence, Godfrey Bloom MEP, responded to a quip about his previous apercu that a woman's place was cleaning behind the fridge with the declaration, with reference to the women present, "This place is full of sluts!" Had he really used the word "sluts", a reporter checked after the event. "Was there a single woman in there who didn't laugh at the joke, you sad little man?" Bloom replied. 
 Indeed, blessed with a clutch of cameras and political reporters, Bloom's thinking was finding itself freer than ever. Michael Crick of Channel 4 News attempted to ask the MEP why the conference programme, entitled "Changing the face of politics", featured among its 272 Ukip faces not a single black one. 
 "What a racist comment. How dare you, that's an appalling thing to say, you're picking people out for the colour of their skin? You disgust me," said Bloom, before beating Crick around the head with the programme. 
 All red meat to the delegates, of course, for whom Bloom's rock-star status was rapidly eclipsing even that of disgraced ex-telly Tories Neil and Christine Hamilton, who have hitched their sputtering stars to the Ukip wagon and were sporting a party tie and red white and blue jacket, respectively, on the conference floor. 
 But by the time he appeared on the main conference floor a couple of hours later, a storm was already brewing about his "sluts" remark, and Farage, who admitted in his speech to having a "blistering row" recently with Bloom (perhaps over another remark referring to "bongo-bongo land") in a Strasbourg restaurant, was telling reporters he would meet the party chair but believed the MEP should have the party whip withdrawn. Eventually that whip was withdrawn. Still for the time being the party's defence spokesman, however, Bloom made his speech, secure within these four walls at least. He was introduced, to roars of laughter, as "one of Ukip's most enigmatic speakers"."It's good to know who your real friends are," said the MEP, as a battery of cameras clicked in his face. "Us!" yelled a voice from the floor.