Never has Banquo looked this good. Shakespeare's original desperately unwelcome "ghost at the feast", who shimmered in to remind an angry, petrified Macbeth of past sins and complicity in murder, isn't normally presented as quite so… orange. 
 But Banquo hadn't, at least as far as we were told, spent his immediate afterlife flying to hot, expensive places to keep his bank manager and wife in the smiles to which they have become accustomed. For Tony Blair it's been a more pleasant kind of afterlife, more a kind of apr&egrave;s-vie. 
 This, then, was the first in a series of electoral compromises between Blair and Gordon Brown; an appearance, at Trimdon Colliery Labour Club, in which the former PM backed his successor, and landed some sharp blows on the Tories. 
 The party can't keep Blair totally hidden, because it will just increase the clamour over his non-appearance; but neither can it risk his full-blown exposure (or, quite possibly, afford the appearance fees), lest Iraq crops up. 
 Thus, two or three agreed appearances, Brown and Blair have managed another compromise and the current PM escapes relatively unscathed (although, as was rather wisely pointed out by Sarah Teather on Thursday's Question Time , Blair's appearances might actually do more damage to David Cameron, as voters are reminded of the last time they quite fell for a smooth-talking stylish PR merchant). 
 What is most affecting about this picture, personally, is not the change in Blair – everyone gets older, everyone loses some hair, everyone tans, except George Osborne – but the setting. This was where it all began. A friendly little club, with wry north-east laughter and subsidised beer, where Blair began his "project" and where he was always accorded a warm welcome – and seemed, in fact, warmly at home, talking football and spilling beer, even when he was becoming used to far larger stages. 
 But I remember him specifically here in 1997, the day of that election, before it all started to go so right and so wrong. Faintly awkward, almost gauche, already with many cares, but all of them leavened and lightened, crucially, by hope. What can he hope for now? 
 I also remember, that night, his utter care in sounding non-triumphalist, despite his swingeing victory over John Major. His victory speech, to a hall packed with relief and, almost, love, was actionably careful, non-gloating, though he did have a certain right: full of the same stump-speech platitudes, despite Britain having twisted on its axis that night, and I first felt the tiny niggling terror that he might have no grand plans for anything except power. 
 Now is not the time for self-justification. But I feel the hand of hist… no; I feel it worth mentioning, in self-aggrandising fashion, the last line of that 1997 piece: "Things can only get bitter." There are, sadly, so many other things in life which I wish I'd got as right. 