Like recalcitrant pupils bribed with the promise of a treat on the first day of term, MPs hurried back to Westminster after the summer break with less foot-dragging than usual. The tea room was crowded by mid-morning. You could see why. Apart from ministers about to be sacked in David Cameron's first unforced reshuffle, everyone was guaranteed some cruel laughter. 
 Tory MPs arrived hoping that they or their chums would finally get that overdue promotion while the blood of their enemies – near-communists like Ken Clarke – would flow down the gutters like puke after a teenage party. Labour could look forward to abusing the unstoppable Michael Gove for this year's botched GCSE results. As for Lib Dems, simply by suggesting that Nick Clegg pass the leadership torch to a new generation (Vince Cable), obscure MPs could get their name into a rightwing newspaper. Assorted nationalists could jeer at them all. 
 Bliss! Could it get any better? It could and it did. Gove grandly swept aside all criticisms of his own role in shifting the GCSE goalposts. It would be quite wrong for ministers to meddle with exam results, let alone with the regulator, he piously insisted. On a quite separate matter the education secretary confirmed that it would soon become easier to sack bad teachers – or "underperforming staff", as he chose to put it. 
 Downing Street could not have expressed it better. Which of headmaster Cameron's underperforming staff were making their last ministerial appearances on Monday – and which backbench thruster making a final "look at me" display of ultra-loyalty will be rewarded with a job by teatime on Tuesday? 
 The genial literature buff John Hayes, the lifelong learning minister, is tipped for the chop by that shadowy Westminster figure, the Great Mentioner, who peddles gossip in reporters' ears at reshuffle time. If so Hayes's last words to Hansard will have been to quote Marcel Proust to the effect that "we must not receive [wisdom], we must discover after a journey". It is the minister's flowery way of promoting apprenticeships; not so much Swann's Way as Swan Hunters. 
 Will Hayes be ministerial dust by Tuesday night? Or will the Proust wing of the Tory party (not as influential as it was) save his skin? Will Damian Green, the too-civilised immigration minister who followed Gove into the dock, survive the cull? 
 As he defended the Home Office's latest mini-shamble, London Metropolitan University's withdrawn licence to recruit foreign students, Green gave as good as he got in the face of Labour humbug. But he was polite. Is that good enough? 
 And those late job applications – conspicuously unctuous questions from Michael Fallon, from Matt Hancock and little Robert Halfon – will they carry them over the wannabe line? Will one of them be proud under-secretary for Post-it notes by nightfall? Battle-scarred Labour MPs can barely conceal their amazement that Cameron did not do his reshuffle in late July so that the fallen could get over it – and the new ministers find their feet – by September. For them this reshuffle will keep on giving. 
 Until it does there is Clegg. Back in late July, when he announced that Lords reform had been found stabbed in a corridor, he swore revenge on both Labour and the Tories for the crime and promised to report progress when MPs came back from the beach. Good as his word, Clegg duly made a statement, one which invited guffaws from opponents of Lords reform, dismay at his lack of courage from genuine reformers and crocodile tears from the Labour frontbench. It always favours reform but never the one on offer. 
 It can't have been much fun. But Clegg did better than usual. There was a jaunty irony in his tone as if he knew he had been suckered and decided not to mind. In Clegg's search for an authentic public voice this was progress. No, I won't myself be taking an undemocratic peerage ("Call me old-fashioned, but …"), he assured Dennis Skinner. Someone else reminded him of rival plans to make peers retire. You can retire a few of mine, Clegg replied. 
 What can he mean, Lord Oakeshott ? 