Why, of course, he would be there, friends insisted to anyone who would listen early on Monday. He had done nothing wrong, and had every right to reoccupy his seat. Oh – and he'd bring legal action if the party tried again to stop him. 
 "Well, let's see what happens later today," Nick Clegg told Justin Webb on the Today programme. 
 Clegg wanted to talk about mental health, ahead of his launch of a new government action plan "to bring mental health out of the shadows and to give people with mental health conditions the support they need and deserve". 
 But all Webb wanted to talk about – all anyone in Westminster was interested in talking about was the prospect of Lord Rennard's imminent return to the Lib Dem benches when business opened in the Lords at 2.30pm. 
 The noble lord, his supporters insisted, had been cleared of accusations that he sexually harassed four women, after an independent QC found there was not enough evidence to convict him in a court of law. And though Alistair Webster had called on the peer to have the decency to make an apology for their "distress", having found the women's accounts "broadly credible", Rennard, they insisted, was obliged to do no such thing, as he continued to deny any wrongdoing. 
 Clegg, too, had pleaded for an apology (though we can assume the chances of any Rennard act of contrition being released as a charity single, like Clegg's 2012 mea culpa over tuition fees, are slim). Why didn't he just suspend him, asked Webb. That was where the Lib Dems' enviably straightforward party management structure came in. "There is not a button that I can push," said Clegg, earnestly wishing there was. 
 Lord Rennard of Wavertree is certainly blessed in the loyalty of his friends. And as they toured the television studios in his defence they were doing much to keep matters in perspective. Look, we were only talking about the equivalent of some mild Italian bottom-pinching, Chris Davies MEP said on Sunday; indeed, if there was anything this process reminded him of it was the Salem witch trials. 
 Another Lib Dem peer, popping up on the Daily Politics, could see other, entirely apposite, historical parallels. What the party needed, Lord Greaves had decided, was "a peace and reconciliation process". "If it works between Gerry Adams and Ian Paisley … if it worked in South Africa …" 
 He was quickly shushed by his party's former leader Menzies Campbell, another guest. George Mitchell might have helped to bring to an end Northern Ireland's murderous four decades of Troubles, but even he knows when he is beaten. 
 As the hour approached, peers and press filed into the upper house, a few craning expectantly towards the benches, just to check. Rennard, however, was not there. Nor, for the moment, was he a Lib Dem, having been suspended once again, accused of bringing the party into disrepute. His reputation, and to a large extent the authority of Britain's deputy prime minister, now lies with the mighty Liberal Democrat English regional parties committee. 
 In a statement released to the press, Rennard said he was unwell, revealing he had suffered "severe stress, anxiety and depression" and had considered self-harm. The accusations, which he continues to deny, had left him, in the word of the moment, "enormously distressed". He had not had any contact with his party's leader for 11 months, he said. 
 What a day for Clegg to talk about mental health. What a mess.