Cameron and Osborne's historian-in-chief, Niall Ferguson, has a new conceit – that there were six applications or "killer apps" fundamentally critical to the flourishing of western civilisation. Wikipedia, meanwhile, defines "killer apps" as a couple of notches down the civilisation scale – Sonic the Hedgehog was an application that revealed, for a bit, the genius of the Sega megadrive upon which it was run. 
 So our government could also be said to be working up some apps for the economy. Tories and Lib Dems are combing through the big spending offices of state and applying six treatments they think can make the difference between growth and no growth. Everyone, from permanent secretaries at the Treasury and its homunculus (the department for business) have grown portly, breaking bread with businesses and industry leaders in what No 10's radical mandarin, Sir Jeremy Heywood, has soberly dubbed an "intensive dialogue". One observer said: "It's at warp factor 5 in there." 
 Maybe warp factor 6 after growth became a smaller pin prick on the horizon last weekend. Early January figures for the last quarter of 2010 showed the economy contracted. Last Friday they were revised down. Events in the Middle East won't help – government sources know a spike in oil prices derailed the last recovery. "Now things that were not on the table," says one, "very much are." 
 The growth review "killer apps" are conceived as six horizontal strands – "cost free" principles that cross six Whitehall departments which are vertical strands. It's a portcullis lattice possibly designed to come crashing down on naysayers who decide this government has got no plan. Possibly, also, it's too techy for human consumption. 
 Ferguson's killer apps included "democracy" and "science"; Osborne's overlap ("competition") but they are mostly from the more desiccated part of the sociology dictionary: deregulation, planning, innovation. Across Whitehall they have pitted the government's economic liberals against conservatives. 
 Vince Cable and George Osborne are, sources say, now agreed that freeing up the planning regime would be a cost-free way to boost growth: Osborne is the anything-goes zealot, Cable would like some stipulation of land use but not too much. Overall, it is Lib Dems concerned about productivity levels pushing this; it would mean cheaper homes built for the less well off, they tell their base. 
 Cable's idea of "land auctions" – offering councils financial incentives to grant planning permission – could be supported, though it carves up Tory cabinet ministers Eric Pickles and Oliver Letwin. 
 Government sources suggest some of the localism bill, in which neighbours can register their opinions through Letwin's "neighbourhood plans" and binding referendums, may be rescinded as pure localism is sacrificed for growth. 
 There's now also a consensus at the tier of government beneath Cameron and Clegg that there should be some building in the green belt. Cameron was suggesting this in 2005 but sources say he is now wary after the disaster of the mooted forest sell-off. Liberal Lib Dems have been pushing this just as hard as liberal Tories. "Nimbyism is a problem," a pro-Lib Dem says, and even their sceptics don't dismiss the idea out of hand, just plead for it to be handled better than the forest sell-off idea. 
 Another killer app would be deregulation, as much as Brussels will allow. Government sources think, for instance, they may have to postpone the agency workers directive, which instructs employers to pay temps the same benefits as staff. This is due this autumn but could trigger a mass rise in unemployment, especially of women. Hardly suggestive of "growth". 
 There will be more, a Lib Dem source cautions: national pay scales, limiting the minimum wage, curbing of all kinds of employment rights as much as the law will allow. The battles on deregulation across Whitehall are such that for the first time this week Cameron had to step in and knock heads together. 
 Innovation would be a third killer app. Those involved say Cameron will allow some Mandelsonian intervention on behalf of small and medium-size businesses. The BBC, with Chris Patten as its new chair, could become a creative heavy player in UK plc, commissioning more programmes from small, independents. There is also high-level interest in the project of the journalist Martin Bright, helping unemployed people into creative projects. 
 Cameron has expressed opinions, people don't know where the Clegg vetoes will fall. He's supposed not to be in the mood to take more batterings after tuition fees. 
 The Tories believe Ed Miliband is lurking in the unions' deep baggy pockets. Their votes won him the leadership and they account for a big whack of donations to the Labour party. But if you're a union leader, you can not see anything in your pocket. Any of them. 
 The party's general secretary, Ray Collins, has, they say, unilaterally shrunk the unions' power on the committees of Labour's ruling national executive committee that deal with party elections and candidate selection. He's supposed to have done the same for gender equality quotas. 
 Tony Woodley and Paul Kenny wrote to Collins complaining about his "unauthorised changes" to Labour rules. "A culture has arisen," the pair's letter reads, "that doesn't feel itself bound by the rules or the checks and balances of party democracy." Replying, Collins says the rule changes happened ages ago, not much he can do. So the party's set for a serious battle of wills. 
 Collins backed David not Ed Miliband and union sources are certain he is shoring up the party machine against the Labour leader: in favour of the party's right. Ed tried to do something about this; he ennobled Collins shortly after becoming leader on the proviso he stood down – but so far Collins hasn't budged. 
 How will the unions respond? Disaffiliation is not on the cards but they want to be sure Miliband moves to act, and predict others will pile on the pressure soon.