David Rowland, the multimillionaire former tax exile with the belated itch to serve his country as the next Tory party treasurer, is not the first such candidate to find his CV a little too colourful to handle the job. This week he resigned, pleading pressure of work, even before he started. 
 Rowland will not be the last such candidate to stumble, either. Money men with the Midas touch, who offer to raise millions for the cash-strapped political party of their choice, can be a touchy lot. They know that party leaders usually need them more than they love them. 
 But the more fastidious are also sensitive about their reputations – and the risk that others with shadier professional pasts, alleged or real, may damage their fundraising. 
 There is also a competitive element in the mix. In his memoirs, Tony Blair's fundraiser, Lord Levy, admitted to being "upset and angry" when he learned that Blair had gone behind his back to seek help from venture capitalist Sir Ronnie Cohen, hitherto Gordon Brown's money man. 
 Either alarm or the competitive streak seems to have finished Rowland. The Belize billionaire Lord Ashcroft , himself a controversial figure who only belatedly admitted his non-dom status this year, and the outgoing treasurer, Michael Spencer, warned David Cameron against going ahead with Rowland's appointment. 
 Rowland is Britain's 25th richest man, worth a reported £730m, whose self-made career was flecked with controversy. He was also targeted for a colourful private life and for the years he spent as a tax exile on the Channel Islands. 
 The prime minister stands of pushing such appointments through the supposedly independent party board after failing to have made due diligence tests. "The board is a joke, it rubber-stamped it. Why do we bother?" board members have asked themselves. 
 Yet Spencer had been forced to step down as treasurer after breaching City rules by failing to tell fellow directors he was using the shares he owned in a company he chairs as surety for a bank loan. 
 In the anything-goes era of the super-rich it is hard to find candidates with hands clean enough to withstand aggressive scrutiny. Sir Philip Green, appointed to review waste in Whitehall, has endured a media kicking over his tax affairs. 
 The man left holding the financial reins is co-treasurer Stanley Fink, currently working with Lord Levy in running International Standard Asset Management. By City standards, his reputation is very wholesome, buttressed by many years of raising money for good causes – and giving away a third of his annual income. 
 The ironies of the situation abound. Men such as Fink benefited hugely from Labour's pro-business tax policies when capital gains tax was lowered to 10%. Yet it was the Tories who benefited when big rollers realised that in Cameron – at last – they had a winner.