Britain's latest coalition government took office in Edinburgh when Alex Salmond, doughty champion of renewed Scottish independence , was formally elected first minister in tandem with the moderate Scots pragmatist, Alex Salmond. 
 It's a job share. Between them the pair have won an outright majority in the Holyrood parliament and now face the difficult task of governing without the problems that beset Cameron and Clegg. 
 The kind of pressures which may tear the Two Alexes apart were evident throughout the brief election process in the spectacular parliament building at the far end of the Royal Mile. All the party leaders made speeches, including the two Mr Salmonds. Both of him was brilliant, as befits the most successful politician currently practising anywhere in the British Isles, Celt or Saxon. 
 The day's ceremonies were the climax of the 6 May election, which saw the once-derided SNP trounce its historic enemies. It now forms the first majority since devolution in 1999: 69 MSPs out of 129 with once-mighty Labour reduced to a rump. At just four the Lib Dems include Willie Rennie, new party leader as well as new MSP. One young spark seeking Salmond's autograph the other day turned out to be one of his new parliamentary colleagues. 
 Sharp at 10 o'clock in the hemispheric chamber the SNP's Trish Marwick ("please do not refer to me as Madame presiding officer") called for nominations and promptly suspended the session for 30 minutes (as the rules require), just in case there was a late challenge. Sharp at 10.30 she announced: "I have received one nomination" – two if you count Statesman Salmond and Smart Alex. 
 It was a Gordon Brown kind of ballot, just one candidate. To everyone's relief Marwick confirmed that only a simple majority would be required. No AV, no second counts, just yes, no or abstain. The candidate spoke to explain that he had studied the form (he is a betting man) and knew that the less you say the more votes you get. Besides he did not want to annoy Marwick who is an SNP hardliner, elected in a moment of backbench triumphalism they may regret. 
 No mucking about here with Westminster-style division lobbies, breastfeeding rows or disputed votes: Please ensure your voting cards are correctly inserted, you have 30 seconds, said Marwick. Bingo! Yes 68 votes; no 0; abstentions 57. 
 I shall now tell the Queen he's the winner, said Marwick. It was another symbolic difference with London SW1: we elect, they appoint. 
 At this point things live. Labour's soon-to-quit leader, Iain Gray, as ashen as a survivor of the Somme (he narrowly held his own seat), paid generous, if grey, tribute to a "remarkable" victory and promised to hold the new regime to account. Scottish voters had voted for jobs, "not 57 different varieties of independence," he warned. 
 Annabel Goldie, the feisty, soon-to-quit-too Tory leader, did the same, but better. Acknowledging the first minister's stylish "mixture of chutzpah and undisguised glee" at his own cleverness, she dragged him "back to Planet Earth" by reminding him what every present knew: a majority at Holyrood is not a majority for independence. 
 As if he needed to be told that! What's more, 'whenever he tucks himself into bed in his 'Alex Salmond for First Minister' nightshirt to dream of independence, he should remember he has finally run out of excuses. "Astute and crafty" as he is (that would be Smart Alex, Goldie was addressing here), he now has a majority, so the buck will stop with him. No more sulking or blaming Westminster. 
 A more easily deflated politician might have been sunk by such strictures, later amplified by the Lib Dems and Greens. Statesman Salmond, who had been sensibly schmoozing opposition MPs during the break, took it on the chins. 
 The only blow that might have hurt him came – just 15 minutes into his new first ministership – from the redoubtable Margo MacDonald. The 40-year-veteran of SNP triumphs and disasters, now an independent MSP, warned him against backsliding: more and more Scots want independence and don't you forget it. 
 For good luck, MacDonald offered him a job share. But the statesman and the acute and crafty pragmatist is already sharing – with himself. The hacks had been told there would be no Salmond speech, but he is incapable of passing a podium or cutting a cake without making a speech. 
 He was shamelessly brilliant, kind to his defeated rivals even. First Statesman Salmond embraced everyone. He wanted them all to feel Scottish ("our sparkling sands, glittering granite"): Poles, Irish, Italians, even the English, everyone except those "bigots and fools" who wreck Old Firm football matches. 
 Statesman Salmond mentioned The Bruce, Braveheart, Rabbie Burns and renewable energy. He quoted Hugh MacDiarmaid. He was inclusive. Then he handed the podium over to Smart Alex who renewed his three recent demands for extra powers, what is known as "independent lite" or "devolution max." Then he added three more. Catalan separatists call the technique "poc a poc", little by little. 
 Where is Scotland heading? No one knows, least of all the two Alexes. But if David Cameron wants to save the union he has his work cut out. The 700th anniversary of Bannockburn falls in 2014. 