As the eiderdown clouds skittered across an Oxfordshire sky of blue wash, a horse leaned over its Cotswold stone wall for a pat, and the chatter of birdsong was drowned out only by the occasional passing 4x4, it was hard to disagree with Jill Hill as she walked her young daughter home from school close to David Cameron’s constituency residence on Tuesday. 
 Hill is a Cameron voter, and particularly appreciates the prime minister’s active involvement in village life in Chadlington, the chocolate-box cluster of stone cottages close to Chipping Norton where the Camerons spend their weekends. So to her, the prime minister’s revelation to the BBC on Monday that he would not serve a third term , albeit having not yet been given the chance of a second, had come as no particular surprise. “I think he probably wants to spend more time here,” she said, glancing around her. And indeed, in a setting this idyllic, why wouldn’t he? 
 If Chadlington, it is fair to say, was not quite as convulsed by Cameron’s unexpected announcement as the Westminster commentariat, there had certainly been plenty of quiet muttering, most of it appreciative, about the prime minister’s decision to grant an interview to the BBC’s James Landale while wandering the quiet lanes of the village. 
 There had been little talk of anything else at Martin Slatter’s butcher shop, perhaps unsurprisingly since it was here that the prime minister, after warmly greeting the proprietor by name, had declared to the BBC man his love for “juicy” chicken thighs before picking up a bag of sausages. 
 “When he’s about, he does tend to come in on a Saturday,” said fellow butcher James Brain (Slatter, perhaps overcome at his new-found celebrity, was having a day off). And Samantha? “Occasionally she comes in. It’s more him.” 
 The PM had joshed with the camera crew that he was far from the most famous person to buy his legs of lamb (£13/kg) and beef brisket (£7/kg) at the shop, but contrary to his suggestion, neither Brain nor his colleague Chris Langford had ever seen local resident, Cameron chum and suspended Top Gear presenter Jeremy Clarkson in the shop. “Indirectly we might have sold him stuff – I think someone who cooks for him might have bought something from us once,” Langford said. 
 The PM was right, however, that there were other celebrity customers: Sir Ben Kingsley pops in occasionally “and we get that other actor in here; little chap who’s in Rev”. Tom Hollander, we agreed. “That’s him.” 
 In this solidly true blue territory, plenty of residents agreed with a man called John, whose two young sons happen to play football with Cameron’s son Elwen, that most people were “quite proud” to have the prime minister as part of their community. 
 But there was the occasional dissenting voice. “He’s friendly, he’s affable and the deal with people in the village tends to be that we let him get on with his private life,” said Tony Parkin, picking up bacon in the butchers. 
 Parkin, however, is a Labour voter (“I don’t meet many of them, that’s true”), and while he couldn’t quite see the logic of Cameron ruling out a third term, he was sure his charming neighbour was up to something. 
 “I think he’s a pretty clever guy when it comes to being smooth, and if he doesn’t want to answer a question there are about 28 ways of not doing it. 
 “He knows what he’s doing.” 
