You may have missed it in the pre-Christmas rush, but another former Labour MP was jailed this week as a belated consequence of the 2009 parliamentary expenses scandal. 
 Denis MacShane got six months from judicial tough guy Mr Justice Sweeney after pleading guilty on the advice of his lawyer to fraudulently claiming £12,900 in expenses. No jury would acquit a politician in the current climate of public opinion, he was apparently told. 
 That figures. Just look at Friday's Guardian/ICM poll which found that 47% of respondents are "angry" with the political class and 25% chiefly "bored". Only 46% of 18- to-24-year-olds actually vote, many saying it makes no difference. Yet they are the same people who complain that oldies (76% of whom vote) are treated better than the young. How about a new word: Kidiots? 
 It's the same outraged climate of distracted opinion which demanded a new regime to police MPs' expenses and new rules that are now, predictably, pushing costs up, not down. It's the same clamour to have an independent arbiter of MPs' salaries but howls with anger when the arbiter proposes, as it recklessly did this month , that they get a 9% pay rise in 2015 (or 11% as the media inaccurately prefer to call it). It's never the right time to pay MPs more – which is why they were encouraged to beef up their expenses. 
 Truly, politics is a mug's game for addictive masochists. Just read the abuse in the comments of this article. Just read the uncynical John Harris's interviews with apathetic and ignorant young voters in Manchester. Or Rowena Mason on the kidiots who may never vote. 
 "So what?" you may murmur as you munch another mince pie. "Those politicians had it coming to them. Everyone hates them and they are all volunteers. As for that MacShane, he put himself on the wrong side of the law in forging signatures for expenses claims for travel and hospitality, research and translation fees for trips to Europe he continued to make after Tony Blair replaced him as Europe minister in 2005." 
 Correct. But it is a glib summary and a dangerous one. For all their (much exaggerated) faults, elected politicians in a country like the UK are still a barrier that protects us from the rising power of unaccountable oligarchy and rampant plutocracy which clearly threatens the democratic gains of the last 200 years. 
 Who do you think whips up much of the voter anger against MPs? Why, the oligarch-owned press whose owners and their lapdogs rail against wasteful use of taxpayers' money without paying too much themselves – even as they seek to convince us that plutocracy is good for us all. Check out Priyamvada Gopal's excellent piece about the cult of the super-rich. 
 Or check out MacShane, multilingual son of post-war immigrants, passionate pro-European, Tiggerish in his enthusiasms, sometimes daft but not apathetic or a cynic if respected colleague and justice campaigner Chris Mullin can still write an admiring piece about him. It ought to give pause for though to the kidiots and their disaffected mums and dads, but probably won't. Hey, the sales have started! 
 MacShane is an odd case, even by the rough-justice standards of the expenses scandal unleashed in a highly efficient but distinctly one-sided way before the 2010 election by the Daily Telegraph, owned by the Barclays brothers, two Sark-loving, quasi-feudal plutocrats. Remember, their paper tried (and failed) to stitch up such suburban puritans as Gordon Brown and the hair-shirted Vince Cable – twice in Vince's case: expenses and the constituency surgery sting which backfired over Murdoch and his BSkyB bid. 
 Consider this comparison: shortly after David Laws became George Osborne's Treasury deputy (introducing the first bout of cuts in May 2010), the Telegraph went through its capacious files and ended his cabinet career by revealing the minister had claimed £40,000 in second-home costs between 2004-09 on property owned by his partner – in breach of the rules. 
 At the time I had some sympathy for the Yeovil MP on the grounds that the partner was a man and Laws had not told his Catholic mother he was gay. 
 Reading the parliamentary commissioner for standards' subsequent report I realised I had been generous. Never mind, Laws said he could have claimed much more but paid back an agreed £13,000 and was suspended for seven days. He is now back in ministerial office. 
 Here's the Telegraph's summary of the four (now five) Labour MPs and two Tory peers who have been jailed. You may notice that some of the sums involved are considerably larger. MacShane repaid £12,900 in false claims, though the report of the parliamentary commissioner, John Lyon, on his case – generally hostile in tone, albeit it in the obsequious way often deployed by retired civil servants – conceded that £5,400 of the then MP's claims were probably within the rules for foreign travel. Rough justice, as I said. 
 Former Tory MP Derek Conway was ordered to repay more than £16,000 paid to his sons for alleged parliamentary research work just before the main expenses scandal broke. There are plenty of examples of lesser penalties, the most conspicuous to my mind being that of Michael Trend, Tory MP for Windsor (1992-2005), who made a false claim for a second home and was ordered in 2003 to repay £90,277 before retiring quietly at the next election. In fairness I should add that Labour's Lady Uddin, suspended from the Lords for 18 months in 2010, was ordered to repay no less than £120,000 in dodgy housing claims, the highest sum I can find. 
 Is there a pattern in this? A distinguished Tory columnist once suggested in print that it shows Labour is keenest to milk the taxpayer's udder. I privately challenged him, suggesting that all it showed was that Tories had a better cultural understanding of accountancy and fraud. They know enough not to forge bills or signatures, and that there are more subtle ways to maximise advantage. To his credit, he later wrote back to say that a former Tory cabinet minister with whom he had discussed the point agreed with me. 
 But apathetic and angry voters should know who they are dealing with. MacShane was shopped by an ex-copper turned BNP candidate, and again by Guido Fawkes, the rightwing ("libertarian") Tory blogger. The police dropped his case after a 20-month investigation, but reopened it after Lyons' report based on the same evidence. They or the Crown Prosecution Service briefed the press that the by-then-ex-MP tried to use parliamentary privilege to block them, something he has repeatedly denied. No one has suggested that MacShane was lining his pockets (or his sons' or partner's), merely claiming expenses he was not entitled to. 
 But if I were forced to choose (thankfully I'm not) between the BNP, Guido Fawkes or Nigel Farage (if Ukip is the answer, we are asking the wrong question) and MacShane and Chris Mullin I know whose side I'd be on. As for Russell Brand and Simon Cowell with their don't vote, anti-education cynicism, they're on the plutocrats' side too – though poor Russ probably doesn't realise yet. 
 The current pay regime at Westminster is likely to reinforce a return to more oligarchical habits – the days a century or so ago when most politicians were rich enough not to need a salary (MPs were first paid £400 a year in 1906). It's called the law of unintended consequences and would suit the plutocrats just fine. 
 There is much about which voters can get cross with politicians. The failure to solve London's airport needs or the HS2 controversy are two examples. The looming crisis over energy supply – wind? gas? coal? nuclear? – is another instance of dither. But these situations arise not because politicians don't listen to voters, but because they listen to their conflicting demands and a cynical press too much – and are afraid to act. 
 It's what we pay them to do on our behalf (though not enough). 