They say the Commons chamber is the crucible of events in the mother of parliaments, but sometimes it is just the sideshow. It provides the drama and the theatre, even as defining events are occurring elsewhere. 
 Both Theresa May and the backbench rebel leader Dominic Raab, for example, might have thought that the fate of the projected Tory rebellion on immigration would unfold on the basis of how they acquitted themselves in Thursday's long-awaited debate. But while she was standing her ground, sticking to plan A, the prime minister was elsewhere, actioning plan B: ducking a fight with his troublesome backbenchers. Caving in. 
 Thus, May at the dispatch box was repeatedly asked by Labour whether – having declared Raab's amendment "incompatible"with EU law – the government would vote for or against it. Not telling, she said, at least twice. I am going to listen to what Raab has to say and then take a position. Which was certainly enigmatic and might have been fine, had Downing Street not already indicated to the lobby that ministers would abstain. That they would declare Raab's amendment incompatible with the law, but still not vote against it; all to keep the peace. 
 It fell to Tory hardliner Peter Bone to bring members up to speed, which was striking because it isn't often that the comical spindly Bone says anything all sides might want to hear. Raab, he said, "seems to have won over one member of this house, who is not here at present because the BBC is reporting that the prime minister supports his aim and has ordered his ministers not to oppose it". Raab thanked him, "for keeping the house updated", via his smartphone and Nick Robinson. May might have done the same. Perhaps she should have. But she didn't. 
 MPs largely came to see what havoc Raab might bring but endured 90 minutes of legislative tap-dancing by the home secretary before he was finally called to speak. May was at her most unhurried: filibustering with all the charm at her disposal, running down the clock to minimise the possibility of further backbench rebellion. No clause was unworthy of expansion, no position left unexplained, no intervention rebuffed. 
 She was accused of confronting the house with mean- minded, ill-considered, last-minute legislation; a bit of a dog's breakfast. And indeed her own tough clause – which MPs later passed – did seem flawed, with the possibility that criminals stripped of citizenship could actually be stranded in Britain and the status of children whose parents are rendered stateless unsure. 
 Her response seemed to be that whatever one thought of her measure, Raab's was illegal – even more of a dog's breakfast. In the precincts of Westminster, there's a well nourished dog. 
 Bill Cash asked the home secretary, who coined the phrase the "nasty party", whether she worried that they risked looking like that nasty party. She said not, rather curtly. Pete Wishart, of the SNP, told her that having considered her proposal, he had decided that she didn't have a clue. "To say this was concocted on the back of a fag packet would do a great disservice to fag packet speeches." For all the yearning for consensus, the two couldn't agree. 
 Raab, meanwhile, cut an anxious figure four rows behind: fidgeting, shuffling papers, staring at his smartphone, like a teenager waiting to be called for a piano examination. He spoke for 20 minutes and didn't seem flustered by the notion that a lawyer might propose legislation incompatible with the European convention, which was his speciality when he worked at the Foreign Office. He later lost his amendment because of Labour and Lib Dem votes against and Downing Street's decreed abstentions. But he ended the day with his stock higher. 
 MPs do worry about foreigners, and not just those who have obtained British passports. Earlier the culture secretary, Maria Miller, was urged to show her disgust at President Putin and the awful homophobia in Russia by staying away from the Sochi Olympics. Labour's Chris Bryant suggested she might send as our representatives the likes of Nicola Adams, John Amaechi, Clare Balding and any other gay and lesbian personalities who might effectively convey to Putin our higher tradition of tolerance. But the secretary of state said she and sports minister Helen Grant had already made arrangements to attend and they were going. "So you just don't care," retorted Bryant. Which seems unfair. Once airline tickets are booked, it's jolly hard to change them.