Four long months after it wheezed into life, the Labour leadership contest has proved one thing beyond doubt: for all the ideological gymnastics of the New Labour years, the party's political centre remains much where it ever was – on what used to be called the soft left. Spurning the most laissez-faire aspects of the Blair and Brown years has been obligatory. A high pay commission and living wage are the season's policy must-haves. Equality is all the rage; even David Miliband has been chided by the Times for looking dangerously social democratic. 
 What has happened to the party's right? Most of its remaining number are clustered around MiliD, and aside from the odd pop at "Red" MiliE, keeping shtoom. But do not be fooled: they are as fired up as ever, and preparing for a return once the membership gets back to leaflets and balloons. 
 In certain Labour circles, the notorious final chapter of the Blair memoir (rough precis: the coalition is right about the deficit, and we should prepare to bomb Iran) is not as heretical as some people would like to think. The right's influence is there in the survival of the Alistair Darling doctrine on spending cuts, whereby the final demise of Keynesian economics threatens to become a matter of three-party consensus. By way of inside-the-beltway stuff, consider recent events at the once archetypal New Labour thinktank Demos. Here Kitty Ussher, the former City minister and ex Labour MP, has just been appointed director, and she started her time by warning against the break-up of the banks – a very 2006 kind of position that puts her to the right of Vince Cable, Mervyn King and Nigel Lawson. 
 Which brings us to The Crisis of Social Democracy , a newly issued and already much discussed Demos text by the writer, pollster and Labour friend Peter Kellner. Any fainthearts may want to stop reading now, for its 5,000 or so words lay waste to standard centre-left ideas with all the reckless energy of a late entrant in a stock-car race. Orthodox social democracy – understood, among its other fundamentals, as a belief in free and mostly universal state services, and the pursuit of greater income equality – is quickly damned as inherently unpopular and, as revealed by the deficit, unaffordable. Polling that claims the public is more comfortable with spending cuts than tax rises isn't qualified as a likely phenomenon of the current fiscal phoney war that will wither when austerity bites, but placed at the centre of the argument. Very quickly, we are deep into a dystopian vision: privatised pensions and unemployment cover, compulsory workfare, co-payment for anything from healthcare to roads, and a binning of any emphasis on greater income equality – to be replaced, says Kellner, by fresh thinking about "the texture of society". 
 Some of this is a matter of provocative mischief. To be fair, he does highlight a glaring gap on the left, where there should be difficult thinking about how to reshape the state to deal with an ageing and more demanding population. On the whole, though, what Kellner proposes is equal parts counsel of despair and triangulation gone crazy: a case study in that peculiar philosophy whereby centre-left politics can only be saved by its destruction. 
 As mad as that may sound, do not overlook the thick lines that connect even the most out-there of his ideas with recent Labour history. Co-payment was abortively floated by Tony Blair circa 2003, and talked up by Charles Clarke a few years later. Workfare was tangled up in New Labour's policy DNA from the off, appealing to Blair and Brown, and built into the welfare reforms at the end of its time in office. And inequality is something scores of Labour politicians still tend to re-cast to the point of meaninglessness: witness endless talk about capability, opportunity, esteem – anything, it often seems, other than income and wealth. The comparisons and precedents pile up; by the end, The Crisis of Social Democracy feels like one of those texts that map out a very believable future, and what the coalition's brazen pulling of politics to the right could easily do to the opposition. 
 When it comes to Labour's next leader, Kellner excitedly points out that for "a few weeks, a few months at most, they will be able to convert the party to a new political project" – which focuses the argument on this Saturday, and that long-awaited result. 
 David Miliband remains the favourite. Despite the odd leftward tilt, his campaign has been characterised by a largely unrepentant take on the New Labour record, a very different position on cuts from the underrated Ed Balls, reams of aphorisms seemingly designed to allow him the maximum post-victory freedom of manoeuvre – and, give or take a few rogue backers of Andy Burnham, the massed support of those on the Labour right. Ed Miliband may be their bete noire, but should he win, contrary to some of the more dreamy talk about his candidacy, he too will have to listen to them. Whatever happens, their spell of purdah has barely days to go – and whispers will quickly turn into roars. 