Ed Balls is emerging as the biggest personality in the Labour team. His leadership campaign may have bombed, but he has become an outstandingly good speaker with a powerful sense of what he wants to say – as he showed in his conference speech. He has been overlooked in the drama between the Miliband brothers. 
 There are a lot of good reasons for making Balls shadow chancellor: he's smart and easily the most effective opposition MP – combative, quick and increasingly engaging rather than hectoring in manner. Denis Healey, Labour's greatest bruiser and a master of invective (Sir Geoffrey Howe: dead sheep ) is proud to claim Balls as his political successor. Like Healey, Balls will not take prisoners. 
 The problems are obvious. First, he has to overcome the long political shadow of his years as the very public right-hand man of Gordon Brown – to whom he paid the most explicit tribute I've heard this week – and second, his position on the deficit. This is beginning to sound more nuanced than it did during the leadership campaign, and he did not directly contradict the Darling position in his speech, nor when pressed on the BBC's World at One immediately afterwards. 
 But there is never any doubt with Balls where his heart is and it is hard to imagine anyone making a stronger case in the fight to persuade voters that the coalition is cutting too far, too fast. 
 Nor would he ever be able to make peace with the Lib Dem leadership. It was clear last May that Balls was not a coalition man, so no change there: but where Miliband sounded as if he understood that politics has changed, Balls was regal in his dismissal of the deputy prime minister: it's one thing to want to be in power, he said, another to sacrifice your principles and your manifesto – but to do it on the back of the poor and the vulnerable, it's a disgrace. There's unlikely to be the kind of "warm" phone call that Miliband and Nick Clegg apparently enjoyed on Monday. 
 There is a third negative: as Balls reminded his audience, he has known and worked alongside young Ed for a number of years – most of them as his senior. Balls could not have been more generous this morning, but the downside of the Miliband "new generation" strategy is that those who, like Balls, were hewing at the coal face of New Labour when the new leader was still a researcher on a political programme would be less than human if they didn't wake in the small hours thinking "it should have been me". 
 And then there's his reputation among his parliamentary colleagues: only 40 of 255 voted for him in the first round of the leadership elections. The legendary loyalty to his boss made him few friends outside the closed circle. One of the most interesting aspects of the shadow cabinet elections, not always readily interpreted because of the bizarre process of alliances of convenience, is whether his colleagues are ready to forgive and forget his long years as Brown's representative on earth. 
 There is an alternative to Balls: his wife, Yvette Cooper. Equally smart, also a trained economist with Treasury experience, but much less abrasive. The choice will be a telling indicator of the style of Ed Miliband's Labour. 