As UK information commissioner charged with enforcing the Freedom of Information Act and the Data Protection Act, I notice an unwelcome trend in the policy debate where lobbying becomes so over the top that it has the effect of creating the very problems the campaigners claim to deplore. 
 On the Freedom of Information Act, a chorus of distinguished Whitehall insiders would have us believe, against all the evidence, that the act threatens good government because nobody dares write anything down any more. But it's nonsense to say that the act threatens to make public what really ought to remain secret for 30 years (shortly to be 20 years). 
 True, the information commissioner is not infallible. That's why we have a route of appeal to a tribunal. Nor is the government impotent. That's why we have the ministerial veto. The information commissioner's decision to order publication of the Department of Health's risk register, the subject of some controversy around the health and social care bill, will be subject to review by the tribunal, where the public interest arguments can be debated. 
 So the only effect of crying danger is to mislead civil servants, politicians and their advisers that there is no safe space for the development of policy, when the run of decision notices from my office and judgments by the tribunal shows the exact opposite. It is in fact the irrational fear of "no hiding place" from the act that might encourage people to cut corners. 
 Another example: last week, the universities were again asking for an exemption from the act. The drive for open data is seen as a threat to the integrity of research. Yet the lobbying of the higher education sector does not bear scrutiny. 
 The law as it stands includes sufficient possible grounds for withholding work in progress – future publication, commercial confidentiality, or where the publication of complex data sets is not reasonably practicable. 
 The suggestion that keen young scholars will be deterred by the grim reality of the act from undertaking research at UK universities is surely fanciful. But the possibility that potential researchers are put off by the shrouds being waved from academic ivory towers is not. 
 The Data Protection Act seems to attract similar misrepresentation. Campaigners for the victims of press intrusion have the information commissioner in their sights. Rather than give the commissioner the credit for blowing the whistle on the unlawful trade in personal information back in 2006 (albeit the press and the politicians played on regardless), I am now accused by MP Denis MacShane of censorship (The New Review , last week). 
 In fact, our office has from the first been facilitating access by those directly affected to the material we recovered from the private detective Steve Whittamore in 2003. Our "fast track" Motorman subject access service is available at www.ico.gov.uk , as Denis MacShane knows. 
 But his drive-by defamation can only mislead concerned citizens by making them believe – wrongly – that there is no point in checking their status with this office. 
 Quiet, calm deliberation by the justice committee and the Leveson inquiry will dispose of all this special pleading. There are quite enough real issues to sort out. And light, not heat, will illuminate the way forward. 