"This party likes coalition government," Chris Huhne announced at the start of the Guardian's Lib Dem conference fringe meeting on Monday. After a couple of days full conference immersion in Liverpool, it is hard to disagree. I've been to a lot of Lib Dem conferences down the years, and the conferences of their predecessor parties before that, and I can assure you that they have rarely seemed happier. 
 Seen from afar, or before coming to the Liverpool conference, it was easy to get two things about the Lib Dems and the coalition tangled up in one's mind. What's clear from being here, listening to debates, attending fringe meetings and just chatting to delegates is that the Lib Dems have relatively little problem with being in coalition with the Conservatives. 
 It's a bit strange, of course, and a bit unexpected. It's not where most of them thought they would be or where, in an ideal world (as some YouGov polling underlines) they would like to be. But given the options, most people at this conference are more than OK about being in government, even if it is with the Tories. 
 What they aren't nearly so OK about is their co-ownership of the coalition government's deficit reduction strategy. Huhne made a valiant defence of the strategy at the Guardian fringe. All the parties had been overly optimistic about the deficit before the general election, he argued. By 7 May, when the first negotiations about coalition building began, however, the financial crisis was at a critical stage. Europe was bailing out the Greek economy. Spain was under threat. The parties had to deal with circumstances as they actually were, not as they would like to pretend that they were. The Greek crisis was a reality check, which focused the Lib Dems on the much tougher approach to deficit reduction that has dominated the coalition ever since. 
 Andrew Adonis, who long ago was Huhne's SDP election agent in Oxford West and who then sat opposite Huhne in the abortive Labour-Lib Dem coalition negotiations, did not challenge this account of the five days in May. But he insisted that the Lib Dem negotiators had done something fateful when they decided to go with the Tories. They had staked the farm on being able to persuade the party and the electorate over the coming four years that the £120bn deficit reduction strategy insisted on by the Tories was both necessary and effective – and that it would be politically saleable. 
 The critical question in British politics, Adonis said, was whether the Lib Dems can carry that commitment through. Adonis obviously thought they could not. But even Huhne nodded his agreement that this, and not the coalition with the Tories, is indeed the key issue. It is important to keep these two issues separate if one is to understand the Lib Dem mood. 
 Whatever their disagreements on this key issue, all the speakers at the fringe, who included the new deputy leader of the Scottish Lib Dems, Jo Swinson (deputising for the absent Charles Kennedy), were agreed that multiparty politics was now inexorably moving from the electorate into Westminster, and that coalitions of some sort were now likely to be a permanent part of the British political landscape. 
 That's an idea with which the Lib Dems are extremely comfortable. They are up for taking part in any realistic coalition that's going – perhaps, as soon as next spring, with Labour in Scotland and/or Wales if the results permit. Whether Labour is equally keen remains to be seen – the party is in a silly mood about multiparty politics at the moment. 
 For the Lib Dems, though, there is nothing treacherous about joining a coalition or making compromises – a necessary part of the blooding of the party, Huhne called it. The problem, as the party knows in its heart, is in the policy compromises on the deficit they made in May. They know there will be a reckoning – Swinson said she accepted the public will dislike them. But the mood in Liverpool is that all this is for another day. 