Labour arrived in Liverpool at the weekend in better shape for its 2011 conference than the party's internecine history would have predicted. Unlike past historic defeats in 1931, 1951 and again after the rise of Thatcherism in 1979, the party of brotherly love has not resorted to what Douglas Alexander cheerfully calls "the circular firing squad" where, like the last scene in Hamlet, almost everyone ends up dead. 
 That is progress of a sort and owes much to Ed Miliband's emollient style of leadership. "Ed is a good listener," a union official explained in a noisy bar on the Albert dock. "He's like a man who has written half a book and invites you to help him write the other half. His brother is the sort of man who's written a whole book and comes along to read it to you." Votes like his sealed David Miliband's narrow defeat. 
 Will it be enough to persuade a sceptical-to-hostile British electorate that Miliband Jr, newly-wed and Panda-eyed, has what it takes to become prime minister? 
 Not according to the opinion polls or the Daily Mail ("a privileged north London intellectual"). Some party punters are already half-eyeing Yvette Cooper – Mrs Ed Balls – or the next generation of potential winners, Chuka Umunna, Stella Creasy or former Bank of England official, Rachel Reeves. It does the trio no favours and there is no appetite for it. 
 Instead, Labour strategists clutch at passing straws: the coalition is neither liked nor trusted and Tories remain the most toxic brand. The thought nurtures Labour activists' still-fanciful dream – much mentioned in the conference hall and sweaty fringe meetings – of being "a one-term opposition", back by 2015 as Harold Wilson was (exhausted) in 1974. 
 It is not a happy precedent. Political parties that have just lost power after long years in office go into political opposition. But sensible ones also go into therapy, the quicker to discover why they were beaten without blaming the voters – or each other. They also try and focus on the task of reconnecting with voters who don't yet want to hear much from Labour except the mantra "sorry"; "mea culpa", as the north London pointy heads put it. 
 In recent weeks – and again on the conference podium on Monday – Ed Balls made progress in admitting that the Blair-Brown hegemony did not keep a tight enough grip on wise public spending and must do better. But the energetic shadow chancellor, still unpersuaded that the financial crisis of 2008 was worsened by Labour's borrowing during the tail-end of the boom, is not a natural mea culpa type. Miliband is having to learn to do it better. We got immigration levels wrong, he now admits. 
 There is danger in contrition too. The Tories, the puritan left and some of the unions are happy to dismiss New Labour as a costly, immoral and managerialist failure, though it is not what David Cameron said on the steps of No 10 last year. "Try telling that to … " said Ivan Lewis MP on the conference fringe, before rattling off a list of deserving types – the old, illiterate, disabled, unskilled – whose lives were rescued after 1997. 
 Some Miliband advisers really do still think that the current crisis of globalised financially engineered capitalism signals public rejection of "30 years of neo-liberal free markets". Perhaps it should but, as wiser heads concede on the blowy banks of the Mersey, parties of the left still keep losing elections. As for Keynsianism's supposed champion – Barack Obama – he sounds a consistently uncertain note. The coalition has successfully blamed financial failure on "big government" – as if its own "big society" does not need official underpinning. 
 So ideas about reconnecting with voters in new ways that legitimise new forms state activity, as distinct from Old Labour ways, again are all the rage as the party searches for solid centre ground on which to plant social democracy's standard. Union leaders such as Unite's Len McCluskey and Paul Kenny (GMB) want capitalism ("we warned you it would end in tears") more closely regulated and taxed by a party which has restored its links with working people. This is a tighter definition than the Labour leader's "squeezed middle", which now encompasses 80% of Britons who worry – and worse – about paying the gas and grocery bills. 
 Lord Maurice Glasman of "Blue Labour" fame advocates the politics and values of communities that globalism tramples. Last week's publication of The Purple Book, featuring reformist ideas joins a policy bazaar that also includes the Fabians (at it for over a century), Compass, Labour First and many others including the still-Blair-ish pressure group Progress. 
 At its Sunday night rally, Steve Reed, leader of Lambeth council ("the only person in power here is me, that is how far the party has fallen," he reminded a clutch of ex-ministers), aroused his audience with a vision of devolved power in which parents run (council-owned) schools, communities co-own micro-housing-mutuals and ex-gang leaders (it really did happen) win back lost teenagers. 
 There is a rich Labour tradition (Liberal and Tory too) to be excavated here. But all politicians talk about devolving power from Whitehall, only to reassert themselves against local decisions they don't like, as Eric Pickles is already finding. Why should Labour, which tried and largely failed in office, succeed in 2015 if the coalition's economic strategy proves as disastrously deflationary as Labour predicts and – a bigger if – voters reject it? 
 Because that is the way society is moving, reply thoughtful Labour MPs and activists: global but also local, where the strongest residual sense of trust resides in families and communities. Political parties are like families themselves – clubs full of people who know and even like each other, determined not to fall out in tough times. Despite tribal calls of "card vote" and "reference back" from the conference floor, Labour – even in stroppy, militant Liverpool – seems as determined to stay united and cheerful as the Lib Dems were in Brum last week. It may be Cameron who has his work cut out jollying Tory troops in Manchester next week. 
 But major parties everywhere have been losing members for decades and the new communications technologies make them look ever more brittle and unresponsive with each passing tweet and online campaign. Obama harnessed the new power in his 2008 campaign for the White House – though he may struggle to repeat it next year. Can institutional parties create networks which are flexible but more enduring? 
 They are all frantically trying and this week's debate around Miliband's "Refounding Labour" project is part of that process. As the Tory tabloids gleefully reported, unions that pay most of Labour's bills, forced the party leader to modify his plans to give a say (at their expense) in future leadership contests to registered supporters who are not members. 
 But it is proceeding (the devil lies in details) along with other mooted reforms (MPs' contracts for example) which seek to reconnect with the kind of voluntary bodies, churches, unions – student groups, hospital staff, active parents – who were alienated by New Labour priorities or fell through the cracks. It's another form of outreach in an individualised society where fear is again taking hold but solidarity is suspect. 
 Will the unions buy into this sort of open Labour party and its vision of non-tribal community organising? Why not, when they have grappled with similar problems of declining membership and organisation for decades? Among the big three (much merged) union leaders, Unison's Dave Prentis is critical of Miliband's ambiguous support for embattled public sector staff. The GMB's Kenny is relaxed about reform but wary about motives. Unite's leftwing McCluskey, emerging as a quietly cerebral thinker, believes Labour has two elections at most to prove its continued relevance. My members want somewhere to live, a job and a bit of money to spend, one of them explained. 
 Is that too much security to ask of a political party? In 2011 it's actually asking quite a lot, as Miliband's Greek counterparts could explain. But the earnest young man from Primrose Hill with the talents of a good listener is in Liverpool to try. 