In my party chairman's speech at the 2005 Conservative conference I delivered some unwelcome messages. I said that the party needed to change; that we didn't have a vision that resonated with the British people; that we were too unrepresentative; and that the public had stopped listening to what we had to say. Five years later, with a courageous and visionary leader, we've done it. We've changed, made ourselves a party in tune with contemporary Britain, and a party fit for government. 
 I believe we have shown we want to build a country that lives within its means but which has a world-class healthcare system; state schools that can compete with the private sector; and an international aid programme that helps those who most need it around the world. However, with a fiscal deficit looming large, I can understand why people question whether these are still our priorities, and whether we can still afford them in the face of necessary cuts. 
 This is a time of massive national challenge. We inherited a government spending £4 for every £3 in revenues, borrowing £1 in every £4 just to keep the pensions paid, the doctors and nurses in hospitals and the teachers in schools. And it's good that in response to that challenge two mainstream parties came together in the national interest to sort out the problems. 
 There will be spending cuts. These are Labour's cuts, caused by their fiscal fecklessness; they are Labour's legacy. However, addressing the fiscal situation doesn't mean losing sight of all the things that are important to us. 
 To restore the economy to full health, to keep interest rates low and create jobs, some services will have to be scaled back or stopped. We are not doing this because we want to but because we have to: the size of the state is imposing an irresponsible level of debt on future generations and is stifling community and enterprise. However, no one should doubt our commitment to preserve public sector jobs whenever we can and to protect the frontline services on which people depend. We've pledged to ringfence the NHS budget and protect international aid. And we'll save as much as we can from making government run more efficiently and finding new and innovative ways of doing things. 
 Our programme to encourage public sector mutual spin-outs is one example of how we can harness the experience and creativity of public sector workers to do things better and more efficiently. I visited Central Surrey Health this week, which has been involved in the mentoring programme for our fledging Pathfinder mutuals. They are a fantastic example of a staff-owned mutual that, by being set free from the state, has managed to deliver better services that cost far less. I was amazed by the engagement of staff and the responsiveness of management to their ideas. This is what we want to recreate across the public sector; they have blazed a trail for what can be achieved, and we are busy looking at how we can extend this. 
 So we can do more for less. And we can cut the basic overheads as well – the unproductive spending that delivers little in terms of better services for citizens. We've imposed strict controls on advertising spend, property leases, IT contracts and consultancy. We're renegotiating existing contracts to get better value for the taxpayer: Sir Philip Green and his experienced team are helping us with this, and also looking at how we can do things differently in the future to save even more money. 
 We're showing that we are responsible, and that we want a better, fairer country that protects the most vulnerable. Five years on from my doom-laden conference speech, we're a party and a government which can show contemporary Britain that we can not only cope, but that we care. The hard part lies ahead. The prize for Britain is huge. 