On the night of 18 September the most relaxed politician on either side of the referendum debate will be Johann Lamont. While Alex Salmond and Alistair Darling are busy interpreting the writing on the wall and unscrambling the runes of the unfolding day, the leader of the Labour party in Scotland may be permitting herself a small gin or two and a quiet smile. Very few others amid the ferment of Scottish history have been dealt a hand as favourable as Lamont's. No matter which path the nation chooses on the big day, her position will have been strengthened. 
 If Scotland votes to remain in the Union then Lamont will have been deemed to have played her part in ensuring that the Union flag continues to be flown atop our civic buildings. Others such as Darling, Blair McDougall, campaign director of Better Together, and Alistair Carmichael, the Scottish secretary, may each have enjoyed a higher profile than Lamont, but the Labour leader's role has of necessity been a more complex and delicate one. It's been her job to ensure that the red in Scottish Labour has not begun to run through prolonged exposure in the referendum adventure to the blue and yellow of a rightwing Westminster coalition. She hasn't always succeeded in this, but the 41 Labour MPs in London whose jobs she will have helped to salvage ought to be suitably grateful, nonetheless. Instead, a few are planning to overthrow her. 
 It would be unwise here to question Lamont's emotional attachment to the United Kingdom. But don't expect her to be paralysed with grief in the event of Scotland voting Yes. For then she will be left in possession of a prize for which every leader of Scottish Labour since devolution has coveted: outright leadership of an indigenous, independent Scottish Labour party, free at last from the grip of Islington and Oxbridge and their Faustian pragmatism. 
 Many of those claiming that Scotland has become perilously divided against itself because of the referendum on independence are from the Unionist side of the argument and, specifically, Labour. Nor should we be surprised. For such a narrative helps to mask the underlying reality of a grievously divided Scottish Labour party. There is one poll which, if it were to be expedited and the results subsequently made public, holds more fear for Labour chiefs than the big one in September. This is the one which would reveal how many traditional Labour voters are intending to vote Yes on 18 September. 
 Better Together chiefs have thus far attempted to alienate and ostracise the Labour for Independence group. It's merely an unsophisticated front for the Nats, they aver; few, though, are convinced. Within the last year several senior and highly regarded Labour figures have expressed their intention to vote for independence. The list includes such as John Mulvey , former Labour leader on Edinburgh city council, and Alex Mosson , former Labour lord provost in Glasgow, while former Labour first minister Henry McLeish appears to have embarked on his own political journey. More will follow as the date draws near. We know this because, of all those who have crossed over to the other side, none has left the Yes camp. If these several high-profile Labour figures have openly embraced Yes, then we can only speculate how many rank-and-file Labour members are harbouring thoughts of doing so too. It's certainly a lot more than the Scottish Labour leadership are willing to admit in public. 
 This is not to suggest that Labour's Yes contingent is sufficiently large to make a crucial difference on 18 September but it's certainly big enough to suggest that Johann Lamont faces a serious challenge in unifying the party after September. She doesn't need to be told that this must happen before Labour can even think of running Scotland again, independent or not. 
 The Church of Scotland among others has already expressed concern at the prospect of bitterness and resentment cleaving Scotland asunder following a heated and emotional referendum campaign. That, though, will be as nothing compared with what will happen inside Scottish Labour. This has already been evident in the anger of thousands of trade unionists who have objected to their unions backing the No campaign without anything resembling a mandate. There is also genuine anger at the way in which Mosson, Mulvey and other so-called "defectors" have been castigated and dismissed by Better Together. One Labour activist told me last week: "There is a lot of resentment at how John and Alex and some of the others have been portrayed by Better Together. These men have worked for Labour for decades for little recompense. To be dismissed by people whose support for the Union comes with the help of a six-figure salary has caused a lot of unhappiness." 
 So, while Lamont finds herself in a stronger position than any of her predecessors, the extent to which she can defend it and then enhance it rests upon her ability to bring peace to her realm. There are those who, even now, are planning to use the watershed of 18 September to destabilise her. Thus she should be looking about her. There are voices in London with their Scottish lapdogs – and she knows who they are – who would still seek to replace her with someone they consider "more statesmanlike". 
 She must also acknowledge that many Scottish Labour loyalists are genuinely distressed at the extent to which their party has had to button its lip in the face of extreme provocation by its rightwing partners in the Better Together campaign. In particular, over the next crucial few weeks, she must find a way of distancing herself and her party from Ukip and its single elected Scottish member following last week's European election. 
 This is a man, remember, who thinks Scots should breed more to prevent us being overrun by immigrants. Any Scottish Labour politician who thinks a Ukip success in Scotland is a good thing should be reminded forcibly what colour is the rose in the party emblem. 