"Why did Nick Clegg cross the road? Because he said he wouldn't," said a placard bobbing in the crowd of protesters pressed against the ring of steel surrounding the Liberal Democrats' spring conference. 
 This was supposed to have been a Day of Rage for students, trade unionists and public sector workers taking aim at "Nasty Nick" and his "sell-out" party. Yet the turnout didn't justify the disproportionate security operation and the event should have been billed as a Day of Being Really Quite Cross. 
 There was even a hint of suspicion that the Lib Dems were beginning to enjoy their new "nasty" image. Delegates at Sheffield's City Hall – a venue booked long ago when being in government with the Conservatives was a scary bedtime story – looked rather pleased with the 8ft fence thrown up around the fine Victorian building. Airport-style security manned by bouncers conferred a measure of self-importance. 
 "I got pushed in the chest by someone shouting 'Tory scum' and I pushed him back in the chest," said one proud Lib Dem. Your point of view was also important: better to be finally on the inside suffering abuse than on the outside hurling it. Or as the party leader put it: "We've put down the placards and taken up the reins of power." He even mimed this to delegates, presumably on the advice of conference compere and former Play School presenter Baroness Benjamin. 
 But by lunchtime the ring of steel and so-called "walk of shame" from the party hotel to the hall was looking like overkill. Police claimed there were 4,000 protesters. "It's ridiculous, they've portrayed us as if we're going to riot, but Sheffield's a pretty chilled place, we're peaceful here," said Maria, who didn't want to give her full name because she works for the council and was afraid she might lose her job. 
 "It's a sorry state of affairs if politicians have to be protected from the people they are supposed to be representing," said Charlotte Mead, another public sector worker who had turned out with friend Jo Painter. Their husbands were at home minding the kids. 
 "I think it's important that the Lib Dems understand how much anger there is. We are really very, very cross. They've had a hint of power and they've abandoned their principles," said Ms Mead, who couldn't be sure that she voted for Nick Clegg last time but would certainly check that she wouldn't at future elections. 
 In a crowded market of bannerised opinion, the placards vied for attention: "Lib-Dem, Fib-Dem", "You're not welcome here Tory Boy!", "Liberal DemocRATS", "If you're not angry you're not paying attention" and "I only came out for a paper". 
 A man selling pamphlets – "On the necessity of revolutionary violence" and "In defence of the Taliban" – sloped off to Starbucks to change a £20 note. 
 Nick Clegg is Carrie McKenzie's MP. "I voted tactically to keep the Tories out – it was the worst tactical decision of my life," the recently redundant voluntary sector worker said. "I think they've sold their souls for the Alternative Vote and there are far more important issues, like the cuts." 
 Early in the day, when protesters and police on mountain bikes were milling cheerfully in warm sunshine on Devonshire Green, trouble turned up and the mood turned ugly. 
 Patrick Streeter, the poor man's Boris Johnson and would-be Lib Dem London mayoral candidate, mounted a grassy knoll and tried to speak to the gathering. A high-vis-vested organiser grabbed the Old Harrovian and escorted him towards bemused police officers. It would have been a citizen's arrest of sorts, had not the press posse got there first and demanded of Streeter what had prompted this "highly provocative behaviour". 
 Looking smug, Streeter consented to be led away. He'd taken his message to the people, which is: "I need publicity if I'm to stand any chance at all of being selected to run for London mayor." 
 He didn't say that, of course, but it's what he meant.