It's an odd feeling going to another political party's annual conference. I have been going to Labour's annual get-together for nearly two decades now. You get used to the rhythm of it, recognising old faces, gearing up for the leader's speech, exchanging bits of gossip at the receptions in the evening. So visiting the Lib Dem conference at the weekend for an event on Lib-Lab relations reminded me what it is like to be an outsider. Two years ago I spoke at the same event with the Fabian Society. Then I was I was a government minister, defending some pretty unpopular positions. This time the tables had turned somewhat. 
 The traditions of our two parties are not entirely dissimilar. Keir Hardie, the founder of the Labour party, began his political life as a Liberal. The radical Liberal Edwardian governments that introduced the progressive tax system, national insurance and old age pensions were propped up by Labour MPs. Before sitting in parliament as a Liberal MP, William Beveridge designed the welfare state that Attlee's Labour government would later implement. From a personal perspective, I owe a lot to the work of Roy Jenkins (one of the founders of the SDP) in race relations when he was the Labour home secretary in the 1960s. 
 There are current Liberal Democrat MPs that have pioneered social democratic solutions to problems of social exclusion and injustice. Simon Hughes has made countless interventions on issues of housing and youth violence. On Sunday, I listened to Richard Grayson , the former Liberal Democrat director of policy, make an eloquent case for a more active state. Yet these voices are being drowned out by a leadership team that seems to sing from an entirely different hymn sheet. 
 The social consequences of cutting unemployment support for the young and raising the one tax that impacts the poorest the hardest are well chronicled in the tales of social unrest in the 1980s. The successors to John Maynard Keynes ought also to be wiser than to repeat the mistakes of the 1930s, when government cut spending too quickly and undercut economic growth in the process. 
 Those with sunnier dispositions will no doubt claim that Liberal Democrat ministers have tempered their more callous Conservative colleagues, but if they have, the public has yet to see the evidence. A lesson that Liberal Democrats, MPs and members alike, need to heed is that their role in government is similar to Andy Murray's relationship with the English public. When he loses, he is Scottish, when he wins, he is British once again; if a policy is unpopular, the Liberal Democrats will be held culpable (eg "Con-Dem cuts"), if a policy is popular, expect David Cameron to scoop the acclaim. A positive and identifiable Liberal Democrat "stamp" on the coalition will be hard to come by. 
 As the more charitable are keen to point out, coalition governments necessitate compromise. But to compromise well you must at least be clear where you are coming from. The Liberal Democrats will eventually have to decide whether they are the party of Shirley Williams or the party of an increasingly blue Nick Clegg. 
 There is a temptation for Labour to be inward looking in opposition, resorting to tribalism and indifference to opinion formers from outside the party. The challenge for the Labour party is not only to be an effective opposition, but a plural one that harnesses all of the progressive critiques of government policy, including those from within the coalition parties. 
 The challenge for the Liberal Democrats is to maintain their independence in order to fight the next election in their own right and not as a subsidiary of the Conservative party. Given the straitjacket of government whips and collective responsibility, they have to use opportunities outside of Westminster politics to demonstrate they can campaign against Conservatives and form coalitions and partnerships with other parties to defeat them. 
 In 2012, London will pass judgment on a Tory mayor who has done little but govern by press release, who has let air pollution in the capital spiral out of control and has let the number of new home starts fall in the midst of a housing crisis. The likely opponent to that mayor is Ken Livingstone, a man whose record on climate change, equality and investing in infrastructure is undeniable and whose independence and conviction is unquestionable. How better to challenge those that accuse the Liberal Democrats of being Tory "poodles" than to back the candidate most likely to dislodge their master's favoured son? The alternative is Lembit Opik after all. 