Selling off the family silver – along with a whole load of other tat – turns out to be a good way of doing business when your mother happens to be Margaret Thatcher. There had to have been some upside for Carol, I suppose. 
 Mark is reported to be furious with Carol for organising her mother’s garage sale – It’s too non-U, even for someone who has been convicted of funding a coup – but as he’s only been in the UK once since then, for his mother’s funeral, he’s probably not in any position to argue. Besides, when he saw the prices his mum’s clobber was fetching, he might have been disinclined to donate his share to charity. Even the rubbish was selling for 10 times its estimate. “Lot 18, an evening dress of black printed chiffon, possibly by Ian Thomas, late 70s”. Though more likely from the Fenwick’s “Ladies’ Modes” range. Yours for just £4,375. 
 It helped that Christie’s had pushed the boat out, transforming its Mayfair saleroom into the Temple of Thatch. In one corner, a hastily bashed out trompe l’oiel painting of her outside Downing Street, in another, a large mural of her with President Gorbachev in Moscow, and at the front, a few choice artefacts: a red prime ministerial box, a blue dress. 
 But dominating everything, was a huge screen providing a running tally of bids in pounds, dollars, Swiss francs and roubles. It was, after all, about the money. The new money, rather than the old. A few old Thatcher stalwarts had come for the day out. Michael Forsyth, the former Scottish secretary; Jeffrey Archer; Andrew Roberts; and Charles Moore, the old dear’s biographer. They all kept their auction paddles firmly out of harm’s way once they saw the prices being achieved. Moore could have cashed in by selling himself. 
 The show got under way at 3.30pm with head auctioneer, Jussi Pylkkanen , as the leading man. “We’ve had to withdraw lot 13,” he announced hurriedly. Lot 13 was a silver-plated House of Commons stationery rack. Perhaps it wasn’t the family’s to sell. Moving on. “Lot one, a midnight-blue velvet wedding ensemble. Hello South Korea, good to hear from you. And the lady in the room. The lady is not for turning, I see.” No pause was left unpaused, nor gag ungagged as the dress still went for £25,000. 
 Lot five, a Ridgway porcelain oval serving dish and seven plates. Presumably someone had dropped one – as a favour, because they were all truly hideous. You wouldn’t get a tenner for it from a junk shop, but here it fetched £2,000. Lot six, a painting of the English school of Lincoln Cathedral; it looked more like it came from the Woolworth’s school but still pulled in a cool £5,000. Lot 20, a typed, signed version of the Francis of Assisi prayer that Maggie had spoken outside Downing Street after the 1979 general election. The word despair was spelled dispair, so it looked like something Mark had knocked up himself and got his mother to sign: sold for £37,500. Archer’s eyes bulged at that. He’s probably got a few more of those himself back home. 
 The higher the prices, the hammier Pylkkanen became. He almost orgasmed when he squeezed out £242,500 for the red dispatch box – bought by Lady T from the taxpayer for about £100 when she left office – after a prolonged tantric bidding war between South Korea and a woman in the room. “Oooh, I do hope this isn’t my mother on the phone,” he yelped. Titter ye not. 
 There were a few items that escaped the auction – most notably the letters from Mark to his mother asking for an introduction to arms dealers and help in staying out of jail – but there was no denying this was a clearance sale, with the worst of the tat being sold online in a parallel auction for the riff-raff. Where there is despair... The old dear would have loved it, with her friends and enemies at last united. For there was one thing on which everyone could agree: she was worth a great deal more dead than she had been alive.