All in all, it was a big day for George Osborne , perhaps the most momentous since the future chancellor-in-waiting was first allowed to travel alone on the school bus. There he was on the telly with the grown-ups, all of them in smartly pressed long trousers, debating the future of the British economy. The election outcome might hinge on his performance. Scary stuff, dudes! 
 Admittedly, it was only on Channel 4, but a lad has to start somewhere. The real chancellor, Alistair Darling , looked old enough to be Master George's father. The Lib Dem's Treasury supremo, Vince Cable, looked old enough to be Darling's father. It was touch and go whether Cable was meant to be Osborne's babysitter – or Osborne Cable's carer. 
 So how did they do? Quite well actually. They were all quick and articulate, a credit to the political family. That much viewers learned: they're none of them mad. You might even lend them a few bob, which is good: you already have. But there was no knockout blow, no fatal gaffe, no "You're not Jack Kennedy, Senator" moment. Damn! Nothing to laugh about at all. 
 Did voters learn much of policy substance, much about character. No. The session was called "Ask the Chancellor", but could have been called: "Don't Think They'll Show Their Hand." VAT, national insurance (NICs), NHS cuts, they deftly bobbed and weaved. 
 Darling looked his usual gloomy self, as if he'd lost his car keys but knew he'd find them: just right for a recession, as things turned out. He was unexpectedly aggressive towards Osborne and – after last week's budget success over Belize – tried another joke. Race stewards may order a drugs test. 
 Cable looked pale, like an Old Testament prophet just back from an all-night salsa rave which had been raided by the police. He was the night's shameless populist with talk of "pin-striped [Arthur] Scargills" and bankers' "noses in the trough". He was also the most frank, it's a Lib Dem luxury, knowing they won't have to do it. 
 The well-scrubbed audience at the South Bank studios, more young people than will actually vote, liked that. Vince got most laughs. But Osborne, the one who looked like he might try to sell you RBS shares, refused to be cowed by the bigger boys. Far from it, he was the only one with jacket button done up to show he'd been properly brung up. What's more, he started patronising them before they could condescend to him. 
 He called Darling "Alistair" twice – just 10 minutes in – before anyone George'd him. When challenged about the "incredible" wheeze to lop £5bn off NICs – the on-message chancellor kept calling them incredible – he refused to back down. Ditto other daft or dodgy ideas, he didn't blink. Those much-loved "efficiency savings"? If Labour has pledged to reuse Whitehall tea bags and save £97.50 in a full year, the Cameroons will promise to reuse them twice. 
 The bigger boys didn't want to look as if they were ganging up on George, whose make-up made him look younger than his 38 Bullingdon-ravaged years. It just kept happening. In pre-spin politics they called it "policy". Darling and Cable are closer and it showed. 
 Was that the underlying message? Perhaps, but in reality TV shows like this it all depends on the audience vote. 