The home affairs select committee, in the course of its investigation into the riots, has already taken a twirl earlier this week with the mayor of London – an encounter from which Boris Johnson was regrettably obliged to bow out early in order to interview candidates for the post of Met commissioner. 
 Yesterday was Theresa May's turn to submit to the energetic clasp of committee chair Keith Vaz , for a mannered little dance during which he did his best to trip her out of her cherished kitten heels and she, gamely, maintained her poise. 
 "These are very busy times for you as usual," Vaz told May, succeeding, as he frequently does, in sounding entirely insincere, which must be a handicap on those occasions he doesn't intend to. 
 They'd get on to the riots in just a moment, he said, but first the decision to postpone elections for police commissioners from May 2012 until the autumn. "Why have you suddenly decided to make such a dramatic U-turn?" he demanded. And since Cameron had revealed the elections would cost £25m more than expected, where was the extra money coming from? 
 The home secretary, for all her other abilities, does an excellent line in gracious imperturbability. The Home Office was in discussions with the Treasury, she said. "So you don't know!" "As I say, we're in discussions with the Treasury. As you know, chairman, discussions with the Treasury can often be lengthy matters." 
 A little smile, a pause – if they had been in a Regency ballroom there would have been a bow and a curtsey. But they were soon off again, with Vaz trying to stamp on the home secretary's toes. 
 About those Met commissioner interviews – Boris Johnson had given evidence "that a decision, when it was to be taken, was to be a joint decision between you and him. Is that your understanding? That it's a decision of equality?" Perhaps the surest way to aggravate a politician, of course, is to ask them to be explicit about hierarchies – specifically to concede that someone else might be of equal or greater importance to them. (Johnson himself was at that moment ably illustrating this point, engaged as he was in a ferocious photo-op tennis match with the prime minister and two wheelchair competitors, at which the professional athletes may as well not have been present.) 
 Needless to say, that was not quite May's understanding. "I will be interviewing candidates with the mayor of London and will be discussing candidates with the mayor," said May. But of course the formal position was that the home secretary made the final recommendation to the Queen. And appointing on Monday? Hopefully, but not necessarily, said May. 
 Well, retorted Vaz. Johnson had said – "in evidence to a committee of this house"! – that it would be Monday. "It doesn't sound as if these discussions are going particularly well if the mayor thinks he is going to make the announcement on Monday!" Perhaps someone should contact the mayor to put him straight on the Monday thing, he suggested, "unless he is watching these proceedings". 
 (Johnson was doing nothing of the sort, of course, preferring to leap around Trafalgar Square in tie and dress shoes aiming tennis balls at the PM's head.) 
 The committee and home secretary did talk about the riots for a bit. But, never mind all that. Back to "probably the most important decision of your term as home secretary" – the commissioner appointment (and, specifically, who had the final say). Of her discussions with Johnson, offered Vaz, "it's something that I think you are hoping will be something of a waltz, [while] he is expecting a foxtrot. Is that right?" Well, "if you need any help in your discussions with the mayor, this committee is happy to assist." This dance was becoming a little nauseating.