The political season starts in earnest this weekend. After each party has taken its turn in the conference limelight, much will have changed. There are snakes, ladders and landmines for all. The star turn will be Labour anointing its new leader, a party frankly surprised at finding itself already level-pegging with the Conservatives, both at 37% in the latest Ipsos Mori/Reuters poll. 
 But the Lib Dems are ground down to a miserable 15% as they meet in Liverpool: their obituary is already written. How can they survive the boa constrictor they have nested with? Should they stay or should they go? Either way points to the political graveyard. One set of Tory enemies wants to eat them up whole by binding them into a permanent electoral "coupon" pact. Others of their new "friends" want to spit them out as soon as possible to rule again as true blue-bloods. Those who remember the miserable end of the SDP warn would-be cut-and-run Lib Dem renegades against splits in small parties. Dead if they do, dead if they don't – so goes the received wisdom. 
 Nick Clegg is indeed playing his difficult hand badly. With Chris Huhne and Danny Alexander, he is binding himself to Cameron's mast, urging the party to stand by the cuts, hoping to share the glory when Britain becomes the tiger economy of Europe in five years' time. 
 But what if there is no miracle growth? Now most economists, the FT and even the Economist warn that too deep cuts made too soon will kill any recovery. And what if that imagined glory were all taken by the Tories anyway? Wiser Lib Dems warn against this blood-brother coalition of souls, suggesting instead a hardheaded pact, marking out wins to claim in future, ready if necessary to distance themselves where they can when cuts become toxic, by next year. All three previous Lib Dem leaders look on, not so secretly aghast, whispering their warnings from the wings. 
 So that's the strange death of Liberal Britain all over again, is it? Labour can relax, happy to be the only opposition to what will fast become the most hated government of all time? Not so fast. Rumours of the Lib Dems' demise are somewhat exaggerated. 
 This is a flexible, india rubber party, a shape-shifting survivor of remarkable agility. Dig down to its roots, and its Janus faces looking left in the north, and right in the south and west, serve it very well. Contrary policy positions, an ideological jumble and ruthless local opportunism make it a hydra-headed, resilient opponent. 
 Analysis of reasons for voting Lib Dem shows it has always been something of a dustbin party, the "I don't like politics but I do like to vote" party. It has policies on everything but nobody reads them, so the most decently pro-European party attracts bands of anti-Europeans who wrongly assume this is the anti-establishment place to be. Despite the most civilised immigration and crime policies, it attracts racist and bang 'em up voters who never checked the manifesto. For many, this is the escape valve party for a ragtag army of none-of-the-aboves. 
 Will that change? Labour shouldn't count on it. A flurry of angry Lib Dem voters have already stamped away, protesting they didn't vote Tory: they voted for the party that Charles Kennedy very nearly turned the Lib Dems into – an antiwar, left-of-Labour, new radical force. Many are Labour voters forced into a tactical Lib Dem vote by the rotten first-past-the-post system: they won't do that again. 
 But Labour should listen closely to the Lib Dem voters that remain. They like the idea of coalition and parties working co-operatively. They hate Labour as much or more than the Tories: they can't forgive Iraq, or the 42-day jail without trial row, ID cards or what they see as crimes against liberty. They detest Labour's authoritarianism, its baronial fixers sliding favourite sons into warm seats, a thuggishness, a bossiness, the whipped-in policy uniformity. Just look at all the Labour awfulness exposed, partly unwittingly, by the shameless Blair and Mandelson memoirs. There is a lot not to like about Labour, seen from outside. Just look at some of the faces along their benches to be reminded that making Labour likeable again will be an uphill task for the new leader. 
 No, the Lib Dems are not dead yet because, according to John Curtice, politics professor at the University of Strathclyde, it remains exceedingly unlikely that Labour or the Tories could win an overall majority – with or without AV and boundary changes. The number of marginal seats has been in long-term decline, big majorities are over, flight from the main parties is here to stay. That means the Lib Dems may be the hinge party permanently, shifting sides with the winds of change. That's not disreputable: they would have improved Labour over the last 13 years, and they do slightly soften Tory policy. Labour needs to woo, not spew in their direction. How well Labour fights the AV referendum at their side will matter greatly. 
 But Clegg has misunderstood the game, burned his boats and every other mixed metaphor for making a grievous error. His extraordinarily ignorant and ill-judged assault on the benefits system in a Times article this week shows he has swallowed the blue Tory potion in one gulp. He, Huhne and Alexander will be past saving when the force 10 gale of public opinion strikes. Whatever the future of their party, they will have to stick to Cameron. The other 16 Lib Dem ministers will have to decide whether, when and how to save their skins. As for the 57 varieties of the 57 Lib Dem MPs, most will dig themselves into their constituencies and hope incumbency, local issue campaigning and defying their leaders will save their bacon. It may, in seats where a Tory will still be the only alternative. They are still winning local byelections – this week Earls Court went Lib Dem on a 15% swing. 
 Expect only noises off and distant thunder at this conference. Canny malcontents are keeping their powder dry as delegates relish their first taste of power in living memory, rubbing shoulders with real live Lib Dem cabinet ministers. But by next year there will be a traffic jam of reasons to rebel, as cut after cut slices through their constituencies in ways too hard to bear. Here is a party in deep trouble, but don't call for the undertakers yet. 