It was a "never, ever thought possible" moment. Fiery, diehard unionist Ian Paisley sitting next to ex-IRA leader Gerry Adams, their smiling photo sweeping around an astonished world on 26 March 2007. 
 The event that day signified the end to centuries of Irish conflict and soon bitter enemies were governing amicably together. 
 It would never have happened without Paisley. The leader who had always fulminated "no" was the only one who could have delivered that historic deal and finally led his intransigent followers to say "yes". 
 As I negotiated with him, week-in week-out for two years, it was difficult to envisage the past of the gentleman with old-fashioned manners and traditional courtesies who loved jovial banter. Referring to both his spell in jail for rebellious activity and my father's past as a prisoner under apartheid, I introduced them as "old jailbirds"; he roared with laughter. 
 Yet, nearly 40 years before, after a loyalist rally in 1968, he claimed on the burning of Catholic homes by his followers: "Catholic homes caught fire because they were loaded with petrol bombs; Catholic churches were attacked and burned because they were arsenals and priests handed out sub-machine guns to parishioners." 
 He added that the massive discrimination in employment and allocation of public housing for Catholics existed because "they breed like rabbits and multiply like vermin". 
 But by the time I became secretary of state for Northern Ireland in 2005, he had moved on, and appeared to have mellowed from the ranting bigotry of his past. He was extremely shrewd, hugely popular and wary of the British embrace. 
 Suggesting early on that I meet his key compatriots over dinner at my official residence, Hillsborough Castle, he explained: "My men are very suspicious of you, Peter, and I want you to get to know them better." He always referred to them as "my men", and with two exceptions indeed they were. 
 We had a convivial though dry evening – they did not countenance alcohol. I had no illusions that their suspicions had been entirely stemmed, but Paisley confided later that they had warmed to me. "A good thing," he said. 
 Putting Paisley and I together – high Presbyterian and inveterate agnostic, rightwing veteran and leftwing upstart – might have seemed a combustible cocktail, but we got on very well. Despite our numerous arguments, I sensed he wanted to do a deal if it was possible – though on terms which seemed on the surface to be insurmountable. 
 I decided to invite him and his family to celebrate his 80th birthday at an official dinner at Hillsborough, and he was delighted. The Castle's full banqueting table was engulfed by tiny grandchildren and adults to his huge enjoyment, reminding me of my own close and extended family. Paisley's wife, Eileen, was a formidable force and renowned as even more hardline. 
 "You know, she was in politics before me," he said proudly of her election as a local councillor well before he was. The first Christmas we spent at Hillsborough, I invited them both to tea. After some family talk, Paisley and I adjourned to the Lady Grey room for a bit of informal negotiation, leaving Elizabeth gallantly playing host to a one-way conversation from his wife who presented her with a booklet of her religious writings. 
 Escorting him on his own from the Castle a few months into the job, I asked whether he could conceive of being first minister. "Yes, Peter," he said, rather to my surprise, "but only for a while. I want to see my people safe, then step down." Reporting back to my astonished officials the next day, it was evident this was the first time he had given such a signal. 
 Once, during a visit to his Antrim constituency, I invited him to join me in a Catholic primary school. Despite having represented the area for decades as the local MP, he had never before countenanced setting foot in it, and I paid tribute to him before incredulous teachers as he chatted away happily to "the pope's" children. 
 Historians will not ignore his past, but they will surely attribute to him an absolutely key role in bringing peace and hope to Ireland after all the horror and evil. 
