On 18 April 1925 15-year-old Jean Pratt began a journal: “I mean to go on writing this for years and years, and it’ll be awfully amusing to read over later.” She honoured her intention, continuing to write about her life and times for the next 61 years, though she may have found the experience of rereading it a trial: these pages are too steeped in regret and heartache, in loneliness and longing, for anyone to feel very “amused”. They are touched at times with the self-doubt, if not the lyrical ingenuity, of a Home Counties Larkin. Yet they are also hugely engrossing, spiked with wit and charm, keenly observant and consistently humane. They have a sensibility all of their own. 
 It’s one I had already encountered in Our Hidden Lives, editor Simon Garfield’s earlier volume of diaries gleaned from Mass Observation, a project founded in the late 1930s to record the daily experiences of “ordinary people”. Jean Pratt was one such diarist (she appeared pseudonymously as Maggie Joy Blunt) and proved a favourite among readers. Garfield, encouraged, applied to Jean’s niece, Babs Everett, who had kept not only Jean’s MO contributions but her cache of private diaries, recorded in 45 exercise books. A Notable Woman is a finely sifted digest. What’s straightaway remarkable about them is how quickly Jean, a schoolgirl in Wembley, found her voice: if you had to use a single word it might be “soulful”. “I have an imagination. It is my most precious possession,” she writes in August 1927. It proves a versatile instrument. She misses her mother – a concert pianist who died when Jean was 13 – adores her father and finds her stepmother a bit of a pill. But she determinedly occupies herself with the tennis club, amateur dramatics, local dances, and hopes for a life of significance: “I want to do great things.” 
 The years slip by, however, and while dabbling in architecture and journalism it becomes evident that what Jean really wants – yearns for – is love and companionship. Garfield is right to style these journals “romantic”; you have never read a diarist so piteously racked by the search for a mate. In October 1934 she asks, “What is it in me that makes the boyfriends – after an exciting petting party or two – rush off hastily to marry someone else?” It is a question she worries at over and again. In January 1936 desperation drives her to consult a palmist, who foresees matrimony and prosperity: “1939 will be an excellent year.” Some clairvoyant he was! What does happen that year is a move from London to a cottage in Burnham Beeches, and thence surviving the long, hard years of war. In 1940 she fears a German invasion, as many did, and feels the neighbourhood rocked by bombs; she reads terrifying reports of those killed in the raids and rouses herself to defiance (“Are we downhearted? Never!”). Staying with a friend in a top-floor flat in Marylebone she presents a brilliant snapshot of the blitz: “Heavens, what a night! Rooftops pallid in the light of a full moon, echoes of gunfire rolling along the still streets, shrapnel sweeping past our window like hailstones, and in the distance a carillon of fireballs above the chimney pots coloured like the afterglow of sunset.” 
 Yet whatever dread the Luftwaffe stirs up it never matches the intensity and anguish that claw at her hopeful romantic heart. At 30 she is still a virgin, still on the lookout for a man. Chris and Colin and Gus and David hover in the wings, only to drop away. She’s not in love with the unpromising Francis (“a plant in decay”) but wonders if she should plunge ahead anyway. The tension becomes almost unbearable, to the point where the reader thinks: will somebody in the name of pity please do the decent thing. And at last, in June 1941, somebody does. “Well, it was damned painful,” she writes, but you can feel the relief, however short-lived. The surprise of Jean’s war years is that she never seems all that badly off. She has a steady job at High Duty Alloys, she has enough food and coal, she shops for clothes, she keeps a beloved colony of cats, she tries to cut down on cigarettes: “It shocks me to find that they have such a hold on me. F. tells me it indicates a craving for sex. I would really rather have the cigarettes.” 
 But the loneliness persists. She torments herself with delusions about a married office colleague she’s fallen for, and resents the interference of her controlling friend Nockie (“like arsenic … fatal in large doses”). Why was she so unfortunate with men? She herself believes it to be a fault of character, a “reserve” that has kept others at arm’s length. She reaches rock-bottom on VE Day: “God, I am lonely, lonely. I want to be in all this somewhere celebrating with happy people … All my life this has gone on”. And yet through the vale of tears one discerns, occasionally but unmistakably, a contentment with her independence, a kind of stoical buoyancy that enables her to value her freedom and her time. She’s funny, too, about the ambiguous allure of getting what you want. Reading extracts from Eva Braun’s diary she reflects: “Eva Braun did marry her Hitler. But what a honeymoon. What a marriage!” Her other lifelong ambition was to write, and after many setbacks and false starts she completes a biography of the 18th-century actor Peg Woffington – and eventually gets it published too. 
 On the surface Jean would perhaps have seemed to a passing acquaintance just another among the millions of “surplus women” in Britain during the mid-20th century – a shy, nervous, slightly disapproving spinster in love with her cats and set in her ways. If characterised in a drama she might bear a resemblance to the forlorn, tragicomic figure of Miss Jones in Rising Damp. For all the consolation the diary provides her, you sense at times that the writing may be a substitute for living. The recording angel has had her wings clipped. Yet thanks to Simon Garfield’s efforts A Notable Woman shows us, in closeup, how extraordinary the business of an “ordinary” life can be – how much complexity and feeling and humour it can contain. Jean sensed it, too. “I want this journal to live,” she writes on 28 June 1948. “I suppose I must have always wanted this, or I would not have tended it, treasured it so carefully … I may never read it right through myself now – it would suffocate me. But I would like to think of other people, years and years hence, reading it with interest, sympathy, perhaps some admiration?” 
 All three, I should say, and in spades. 
 
