Our wildernesses require their own claims to fame to differentiate them, and thus prevent all that wind-blown swampy scrub from confusing the public. The Yorkshire moors have the Bront&euml;s; Bodmin Moor boasts the beast; Exmoor clings to Lorna Doone, and Dartmoor’s fame relies on The Hound of the Baskervilles and the prison, with Widecombe Fair, Uncle Tom Cobley and wild ponies forming the B-list. 
 For those of us who were brought up on Dartmoor, the reality behind both the menacing and picturesque aspects is, of course, very different. I never bothered to read about Conan Doyle’s slavering hound until I was safely residing in London, while the prison was but a hulk in the fog if you ever ventured towards Princetown, which you didn’t. My father did, however, leave the keys in the ignition of the spare old banger in case an escaped felon wanted to make a run for it instead of killing us. 
 But what none of us pony-riding, buzzard-spotting locals had a clue about was what lay beneath us. All that granite that emerges as vast outcrops of rock – the tors of Dartmoor – and which has been used for house building for centuries, is made up of quartz, feldspar and mica, while the moor itself is not in fact the untouched tract of wasteland of popular imagination, but a working landscape formed by millennia of human activity. 
 Brooding over Devon, this great upland is the relic of volcanic upheaval, and with its gorse, bracken, bogs and winds, it is hardly hospitable. In the Pleistocene era, Dartmoor was an island, its edges formed by waves; it became earth-covered only 15,000 years ago, and was first used for its natural resources around 7,000 years later. The bleak moor’s deforestation, ancient clapper bridges, drystone walls, artillery ranges and medieval churches all attest to centuries of human endeavour, but they are scattered over vast expanses of land. The relics of quarrying, tin mining, railways, standing stones and agriculture are everywhere, but take some looking for. 
 Historian Matthew Kelly is here to help us. Quartz and Feldspar is as hefty as it is all-encompassing: impressively researched, and passionate, it is as much of a crossbreed as that highly implausible Baskerville hound, melding detailed geology and history with local politics, nature study and ongoing debate about the practical uses of this wonder of nature. No tussle over a bypass or a radio mast is too small to include. 
 So who is this book for? It is no tourist guide, nor is it subject-specific enough to be a purely academic study. Even for those of us fascinated by the 368 square miles of Devon moorland, the book can be as exhausting as it is exhaustive. Yet it is a valuable, heartfelt, well-written work, giving rise to many larger questions about cultural interpretations of landscape that could equally apply to the Lake District or the Scottish Highlands. As Kelly says himself, Quartz and Feldspar is “neither a natural history nor a geological study; nor is it primarily social history”. The book ultimately traces the ways in which a “distinct landscape has been encountered, imagined and argued over”. It shows, very skilfully, how perceptions of landscape have changed with each era, the author writing with compelling energy of the “responses the moor has evoked, be they antiquarian, archaeological, poetic, mythic, folkloric, religious, commercial, preservationist or environmental”. 
 The moor has been viewed as both bleak and romantic, but it is the gothic and the ghastly that tend to leave their mark. The opening titles to the 1939 film of The Hound of the Baskervilles declare: “In all of England there is no district more dismal than that vast expanse of primitive wasteland.” 
 William Howitt wrote in 1838 of the “melancholy music … sternness and loneliness … glowing ruddy tors” of the moor. “There are wastes and wilds, crags of granite, views into far off districts, and the sounds of waters hurrying away over their rocky beds.” 
 Over time, giants, druids, and a multitude of spirits have been said to inhabit the moor. The Romantic imagination had a field day with thrusting tors and quaking mires. Mid-19th century fantasies of agricultural improvement were beaten into submission by the reality of weather and altitude, the envisioned patchwork of fields only possible in its valleys. In more modern times, the focus has been on conservation and tourism, and the moor was preserved as a national park in 1951. 
 Kelly could have added yet more depth, with greater focus on the foggy supernatural element, the mythology of the moor – those infamous Hairy Hands said to accost drivers; the mystery of the fresh flowers always left on Jay’s Grave – and on its literature. The Hound of the Baskervilles is summarised at length, and the book is prefaced by a quote from Alice Oswald ’s extraordinary and mesmeric long poem Dart, which is the ultimate portrait of the “huge rain-coloured wilderness” that is the moor, and deserves more attention. Work by Agatha Christie and the early 19th-century novelist Beatrice Chase, known as the Lady of the Moor, could also have been included. 
 However, Devon-born Kelly is clearly haunted by the place, as are those of us who spent formative years there, finding that nowhere else can ever be so wild, mad or extreme, and that life post-Dartmoor contains a certain tameness, a spasmodic desire to tussle with the elements once more. Quartz and Feldspar reads as the book Kelly had to write. At times it reads like a PhD thesis bursting out of control, with its supervisor-pleasing multiple sources and itemisations; but it is hard to imagine anything capping it for research and ardour. Dartmoor has found a new champion, who proves there is so much more to it than an overgrown hound. 
 
