From the outset of his career, Kim Leine established himself as a Scandinavian literary figure without precedent. His debut, the eye-wateringly frank memoir Kalak, charted his Norwegian childhood among Jehovah’s Witnesses, his teenage life in Denmark with a sexually abusive father, and his subsequent years of turmoil and drug addiction in Greenland. After Kalak, Leine switched to fiction: his third novel, The Prophets of the Eternal Fjord, published in 2012, became an instant classic, winning international acclaim and awards including the prestigious Nordic Council’s literature prize. 
 Now out in English, Leine’s astonishing, hallucinatory journey into the frozen heart of Denmark’s colonial darkness is inspired by events during the reign of the mad Danish king, Christian VII. 
 It opens with a dramatic flash-forward to Greenland in 1783, and an Inuit widow standing at the brink of a precipice. She senses someone behind her, “bashful as a young suitor”, ready to do what might be her bidding. Do they have a pact? When the moment comes, she hurtles down “dragging a vertical scream in her wake like an uneven line drawn in charcoal”. 
 If we read on after this point, we have already signed our own pact with Leine’s imaginative world: the reader’s proxy participation in the opening “snuff” scene charges the experience of the next 500-plus pages with an intense emotional urgency that goes well beyond narrative curiosity. From the start, Leine has made us aware of our own tacit moral involvement in something far deeper and more complex than a single death three centuries ago in a remote, alien corner of the world. 
 Oddly – and everything about Leine’s work is decidedly odd – this engagement is effected utterly without any attempt at seduction through character: the story’s momentum is dependent more on the clever manipulation of time-jumps and on the sheer strangeness of the narrative environment than on any charm on the part of its enigmatic main protagonist, the reluctant priest Morten Falck. 
 We first meet him in Copenhagen, where his Norwegian family has sent him to study divinity. Like his hero Rousseau, Falck “yearns to meet people in their natural state, free and unspoiled. Perhaps he yearns to find some natural state within himself.” Yet wherever he goes, he leaves behind him a telling trail of destruction. His rejected fiancee goes mad with grief, and on his journey to a missionary post in Greenland, he turns a blind eye to the systematic abuse of a cabin boy who ends up dead. 
 During his Copenhagen years, Falck assisted in ghoulish medical dissections, exposing “the greenly glistening muscles of the dead, layer by layer, allowing their shameful smells to be released into the air”. In his new home of Sukkertoppen, a Danish-run settlement dominated by an exploitative trading company, the novel’s extraordinarily lush, often grotesque carnality comes fully into its own. And it is here, in depictions of the physicality of Greenland life that amount to a sensory assault, that Martin Aitken ’s translation best captures the rhythm and nuance of the Danish original. We hear “the sound of squelching breasts and hands slapping at lice” in native homes, watch blackened shreds of human skin flapping on a blood-caked whipping post, inhale the hot, oily horror of the blubber-house, witness a five-month pregnancy being aborted with gunpowder, and feel bread and lard moving through Falck’s bowels as “a thick mash of masticated sustenance on the march towards his terrified sphincter”. 
 Spiritual imperatives are also at work. A native Christian couple, revolted by the corruption of the colonial settlers and the open lechery of their former priest, has formed a rival settlement inland, where they combine local shamanic ritual with Bible teachings. When Falck visits the “prophets” he soon realises that the messianic, utopian colony of Eternal Fjord represents a much truer version of Christianity than anything he can summon. And that, as such, it is doomed to meet a violent end at the hands of a Danish colonial system that tolerates the depravities of its own agents but mercilessly punishes any sign of independence among the natives. 
 An abyss seems clearly signposted. But it is a tribute to Leine’s storytelling skill that the trajectory of his multi-stranded narrative remains utterly unpredictable to the very last page: it is only after a series of audacious geographical and chronological spirals that the full impact of his phantasmagoric reworking of historical fact becomes fully apparent. 
 A fervid, exhilarating evocation of faith versus hypocrisy, empathy versus disclocation and desperate rebellion versus grim destiny, The Prophets of Eternal Fjord is a slow-release depth-charge of a novel whose reverberations bear the terrible poignancy of global and timeless relevance. 
 