The author Jesse Ball lectures on lying at the Art Institute of Chicago. In an interview with the Paris Review in 2014, he defined a novel as “an account, or a series of accounts” that create “half a world” – the other half being in the gift of, and supplied by, the reader. The ensuing competition between them – the struggle for closure – will induce the reader to create a “rich world, full of paradoxes or conflicting authorities and ideas”. In the end, Ball believes, “that’s a closer approximation of the truth of experience, what it’s like to live, than a single, supposedly objective account”. Rebecca Bates, the interviewer on that occasion, found Ball (pictured) “by turns both serious and coy” – an effective description of his fifth novel, A Cure for Suicide, a deceptively bland dystopia centred on the social construction of identity. 
 A man wakes in “the Gentlest Village”, first in a series of therapeutic sites that comprise “the Process”, a kind of role-playing theatre or sandbox of interaction for the emotionally and socially wounded. He is described as a “claimant”, although what he is claiming isn’t clear. His memory has been removed so that he can start again. His “examiner” must now help him to reconstruct a basic self: to understand the world, to understand the most fundamental things – what a language is, what a society is, what an individual is and how those things relate to the minutiae of life as lived. They stay quietly in the same house. She calls herself Teresa; she calls him Anders. 
 Early on in the text – A Cure for Suicide can’t quite be described as a story, although it contains and is contained by a great deal of story – the examiner tells Anders what they will do the next day. “We will stand for a moment in the kitchen,” she explains, “which we will have cleaned, and we will feel a small rise of pleasure at having set things right. It is an enduring satisfaction for our species to make little systems and tend to them.” Statements like this set and maintain the tone of the novel. At first, they are distanced but kind. They play equally to the claimant’s fragility and the reader’s curiosity. We aren’t sure we understand the Process, but we feel in safe hands. Ball’s language, like the examiner’s, has a Scandinavian feel; it is calm, direct and seems to tie identity and society together. It gives a sense of progress. 
 Later, though, things become less dependable. The claimant suffers more than one setback. New gaps appear in his memory. Teresa mutates suddenly into a wily old woman who shuttles him between Process sites, often drugged and at night. He is renamed repeatedly. Each step on the way to being well involves increased levels of disappointment and deception. He is given peculiarly specific exercises in reinvention: he might, for instance, have to go to a restaurant and pass himself off as an academic celebrity, “writing a paper”. He and his examiner never present themselves truthfully. Each time they enter a new village, they choose and rehearse a new pretence about themselves. We’re sometimes amused, always shocked by this. 
 The old woman’s lessons carry a sour but recognisable little truth. She knows how to conspire, how to fit in and how much of fitting in is a conspiracy. As a result, she is impossible to trust. Wholly dependent on her, the claimant has no information about the Process – or indeed about himself – other than that which she allows him. Ball artfully keeps the reader in the same position, measuring out a little information here, a little there, always suggesting that no information is, or ever can be, complete, until an emotional disaster, a tragic revelation and two or three extraordinary structural shifts break open our way of seeing things. 
 In a sense, a book about suicide attempts is necessarily a book about continuing to live, and thus a book about how to live. If nothing else, it has to pretend to be a series of meditations on what living is now; some of which, in the case of A Cure for Suicide, seem true but too sophisticated to use. It is important to remember, the old woman advises, that all human bonds are conditional. If you forget that, you may do yourself harm. “The most realistic view,” she says, “is the safest.” At the same time, of course, Ball’s method forbids the realistic view by undermining any reality on which it might be based. For the reader, the real problem of this beautifully written and enticingly macabre novel may be to decide to what degree the Process is decipherable as well-meaning, to what degree it’s an unparseable paranoid nightmare. Also, perhaps, to what degree its theatrics have actually begun to replace the society that made them necessary in the first place. 
 
