My heart always sinks a bit when someone says I should read a book because it’s well written. Praising a book for the writing alone is like recommending a restaurant where the food is well seasoned, or supporting a football team because they are good at corner kicks. But it can’t be denied that Aleksandar Hemon – incidentally, a keen amateur footballer – is a gifted crafter of sentences. His books are replete with the kind of memorable phrases that reviewers cherry-pick and offer to the reader. Here is an assortment from his new novel: a cat purring is “revving his little pleasure engine”; a character presses “his face against the window in the parenthesis of his hands”; elsewhere, “leafless tree crowns scrambled the early morning light”. 
 These bright nuggets are all the more surprising for being written by someone who was born in Sarajevo and didn’t start writing in English until adulthood. Having sought asylum in the US from the war in his native Bosnia, Hemon has addressed the subjects of war, identity and dislocation in his previous novels, short stories and memoir. Like many a transplanted writer before him, he finds himself in exile from the world that formed him. 
 So how does an uprooted Bosnian-born writer with an exquisite prose sensibility deploy his talents? The new novel, The Making of Zombie Wars, is a rather surprising answer. It’s a rambunctious farce that includes zombies, a lot of slapstick, comedic violence, allusions to the Bible and Spinoza, and a climactic showdown involving a stoned Desert Storm veteran and a samurai sword. Coming to the novel from Hemon’s most recent book, the thoughtful and at times unbearably sad memoir The Book of My Lives, the reader is taken aback. It’s like finding an obsessive cinematic auteur directing a gross-out movie: Andrei Tarkovsky ’s lost prequel to The Hangover. 
 Hemon’s protagonist is a 33-year-old aspiring screenwriter called Joshua Levin. The opening chapter finds him drinking too much coffee and embarking on yet another spec script that he intends to workshop in his vipers’ nest of a writing group – an acidly drawn sketch of creative rivalry. For money, Josh teaches English as a second language. His class is a funny bestiary of displaced Eastern Europeans that includes gorgeous femme fatale Ana. Somehow, in spite of a face with “eyes too big and sunken; an archipelago of zits stretching below a dandruff-peppered peninsula of hair; the overbite reliably overbiting”, Josh inspires passion in his pupil. His conflicting entanglements with Ana and his equally gorgeous girlfriend, Kimiko, drive the novel. Interspersed with his real-life calamities are scenes from Josh’s script-in-progress, a clunky B-movie called Zombie Wars, that features a beefy wish-fulfilment version of Josh called Major Klopstock who is battling to rid the world of a zombie scourge. 
 The book encourages the reader to compare the pointlessness of Josh’s comfortable life with the high stakes of Klopstock’s absurd battle. But in truth Josh’s real life and the world of his screenplay are rather similar. Both are populated by stock characters and both climax in cartoonish violence. 
 The Making of Zombie Wars quotes George W Bush in one of its epigraphs. Its 2003 setting and highly critical references to the war in Iraq seem to be staking the novel’s claim to a grand theme: that simplistic worldviews and impoverished imaginations lead to misguided interventions. This is heavy freight for a farce with zombies. 
 How Josh, who is not only plain but whose drippy personality practically exhausts the copious Yiddish synonyms for loser, manages to inspire the fierce sexual desire of two attractive women is the biggest puzzle of this book. It is never clear to the reader whether Josh is supposed to be a schlemiel or a character worthy of our sympathy. If he is the former, it is odd that we spend so much time in his intellectual company and watching him have non-comedic sex. And yet you never feel invested in his emotional life, which is hyperbolic and inauthentic: “his true and only self curled up on the floor of his being to writhe like a fetus in a frying pan”. This simile is forced and ugly. The same reptilian eye notices an elderly woman in a hospital whose “left foot was broken, as evidenced by a baroque hematoma, with which her navy blue blazer perfectly rhymed”. 
 There is more than a whiff of another footballing prose stylist about these chilly images: keen goalkeeper Vladimir Nabokov. But even Nabokov admitted that fine writing is ancillary to the mysterious work of enchanting the reader into a state of “curiosity, tenderness, ecstasy”. He memorably criticised Turgenev for being overfastidious about “the trouser-crease of his phrase; he crosses his legs with an eye upon the colour of his socks”. Of course, Nabokov’s own work is full of the prose equivalent of trick shots and step-overs, but he also knew that a preoccupation with style is often linked to the authorial flaw of frigidity – treating a novel’s characters as a team of wallies to be nutmegged at will by their brilliant creator. 
 
