She is now officially a national treasure: Ali Smith FRSL CBE, the establishment experimentalist. Winner of more prizes than most of us knew existed – the Saltire, the Encore, the Whitbread, the Goldsmiths, the Costa, the Baileys – and perpetually shortlisted for just about every other, Smith produces books that hover between fiction and non-fiction. There are novels that read like lessons in art history ( How to Be Both ), there are short story collections that read like mini biogs ( The First Person and Other Stories ) and there are lectures that are actually stories ( Artful ). With her new collection, Smith now establishes for herself an entirely new role and purpose, as a campaigner for the cause of public libraries. 
 Kind of. The 12 short stories in the book are interleaved with statements about the importance of public libraries by Smith’s friends and acquaintances, a bit like a bonus disc with a DVD. There’s a poem by Jackie Kay, “Dear Library”, and comments and reminiscences by the novelists Helen Oyeyemi, Kate Atkinson and many more, and they all say good and true things about public libraries. (“A library card in your hand is your democracy,” quotes Smith quoting Kay quoting her father.) 
 What Smith herself has to say about libraries is less clear. Readers will doubtless by now be familiar with the general drift of Smith’s work, which is work of general drift. She manages to say important and profound things by not quite saying important and profound things. She is good at suggesting the elements of the unknown in the known, and describing the half-lives and afterlives haunting our everyday existence. She takes us to the edge of things. The story “Last”, for example, begins at the very end: “I had come to the conclusion. I had nothing more to say. I had looked in the cupboard and found it was bare.” In “The Beholder”, the narrator literally trails off – it is a rose bush, shedding petals. “But I prefer the windy days, the days that strip me back, blasted, tossed, who knows where, imagine them, purple-red, silver-pink, natural confetti, thin, fragile, easily crushed and blackened, fading already wherever the air’s taken them across the city, the car parks, the streets, the ragged grass verges, dog-ear and adrift on the surfaces of the puddles, flat to the gutter stones, mixing with the litter, their shards of colour circling in the leaf-grimy corners of yards.” 
 But it’s not so much the subject matter as the tonal range and subtle arrangements of Smith’s work that are unique and peculiar. She is an expert in combining little glimmerings of rapture with rambling anecdotes, asides and learned disquisitions, to create an impression of density and depth. Public Library begins with what appears to be a preface and the words “Here’s a true story”. What follows does indeed sound like a true story, about Ali Smith and her editor Simon coming across some unlikely place in London called LIBRARY, a sort of private members’ club that may or may not once have been an actual library. It’s odd but believable, peculiar yet true. 
 Not everything in the book, it should be said, is strange and exceptional or indeed even new. Homer nods; Smith gets sleepy. “The Art of Elsewhere”, for example, comes close to stating the obvious. “Elsewhere nobody stops you in the street and says, are you a Catholic or a Protestant, and when you say neither, I’m a Muslim, then says yeah but are you a Catholic Muslim or a Protestant Muslim? Elsewhere there are no religions. Elsewhere there are no borders.” A couple of the stories some readers will already have come across in a previous collection, Shire (2013). But there’s more than enough here to admire and to keep one occupied: “The Ex-Wife” is as good as Artful, in miniature; and “Last”, which comes first in the collection, after the preface which is not a preface, is more than deserving of its almost top ranking. 
 Smith’s greatest talent is her ability to produce on the page the effect of a human voice, so that with her books we have the strong sense of reading what Henry James called a “human attestation”. This is why so many of us feel perhaps that we know her, when of course most of us have never met her and never will. This is not just a gift – Smith is gifted, it goes without saying – it is also a technique: Smithying, we could say, which involves the continual toggling or blurring between modes, using a form of postmodern first-person address that guarantees both immediacy and hyper-mediacy. Smithying is super-frank and super-clever-clever. Thus, the story “The Human Claim” begins, “I had been planning to write this story about the ashes of DH Lawrence”, but then turns into a story about a credit card scam, even though it is also a story about the ashes of DH Lawrence. Another example: the story “And So On” begins “Every time I sit down to try and write this story – which is a commission for a short story anthology where all the stories have to be about death – life intervenes.” Perfectly put. Better put than any mere reviewer could put it, looking for a conclusion to a review of the book Public Library by Ali Smith, which is a work of endless interventions. 
 
