This is one of those books that gains an aura of inevitability because of the amount of money paid for it – a whopping $2m. The most respected critics in the US have now lined up to give it their blessing. I opened it with excitement, sharing the common assumption that there must be something exceptional about such a book, especially when it is 944 pages long and the work of a little-known writer. This optimism had sputtered out by chapter two. 
 It’s not that Garth Risk Hallberg lacks talent; he’s wonderfully talented. He’s also unafraid to take risks, and as a result, we get delightfully extravagant passages like this: “It played a big band song from before he was born, a low, nostalgic, glimmering chandelier of a thing, around which a clarinet swooped and dived like a bird had got into the room.” There is prose in City on Fire as transporting as any you’re likely to see in a book in the next 10 years. Then there are the other 500 pages. 
 Two hundred of those pages should simply have been cut from the book. Almost all long books have their longueurs – few readers are riveted by every single page of War and Peace – but here, the slow passages are not just slow, but stonily inert. In one egregious instance, a character wakes up in bed and lies pondering her hangover for five pages. If you’re thinking these self-reflections are Proustian, then think again: “She’d had too much champagne – had thrown it up, she recalled now, on the edge of the FDR, which accounted for the chalky mouth, though she must have brushed her teeth, she wouldn’t have gone to bed without brushing, would she? Honestly, who could remember?” 
 Even the action scenes include long, repetitive passages of soul-searching. In fact, Hallberg’s favourite move is to interrupt an action scene with pages of soul-searching, then end the chapter before the action can take place. Often, when he comes back to the scene in a later chapter, the action has already taken place, and the character is back to soul-searching. 
 The plot concerns a group of people loosely connected to a seemingly random shooting in Central Park. It’s New York City in the lawless 1970s, a setting whose phantasmagoric elements are richly exploited by Hallberg, and the book culminates in the blackout of 1977, in which the city was consumed by looting and arson. The cast includes the black-sheep scion of a banking empire and his more straitlaced African-American lover; an anarchist cell and the nerdy suburban boy who is sucked into its orbit; a noble working man who is the last in a long line of firework manufacturers; a<strong> </strong>police detective who, debilitated by the polio he had as a child, is under pressure to retire; a disillusioned journalist; assorted punks and a malevolent, sociopathic banker. All of these are point-of-view characters, and the breadth is impressive. Few authors dare to take on such an array of personalities. 
 Unfortunately, these disparate characters are all uncannily alike. In their abundant interior monologues, they tend to fall into Hallberg’s voice, a nostalgic, glimmering chandelier of a thing with a tendency to cross the line into self-indulgence. Regardless of their educational level, they think in terms of “lucubrations”, “stochasms”, and “iambs”. However mundane the situation, they slip into the elegiac and ecstatic states most conducive to glimmering-chandelier prose. 
 When the characters break into dialogue, however, they undergo a peculiar transformation. They are still uncannily alike – the black 20-something from small-town Georgia has the same diction as the middle-aged white New York banker – but they’ve lost 50 IQ points, and now can only express themselves in New-Agey platitudes. “Maybe I don’t understand me,” they say, or, “I sometimes wonder how random things really are.” 
 What’s more surprising in City on Fire are the many small blunders that an editor would normally fix. Among the lovely passages are blatant misfires such as “The door went into histrionics”, or “In the moonlight through the ceiling’s trapdoor, her tits looked like soft blue balloons”. Sometimes the problem is a description that is oddly wide of the mark: “six-legged forest creatures came lumbering out of the broiler grate”, where the lumbering forest creatures turn out, bafflingly, to be cockroaches. Verbal glue-traps like these crop up on almost every page. 
 There are also many large and small implausibilities. For example, whenever anyone discovers evidence in the ongoing murder investigation, they keep it a secret, without any explanation being offered. This happens with the victim’s best friend, with a journalist who becomes obsessed with the case, and even with the police detective assigned to solve it – and for him, it means carrying a pair of urine-soaked jeans in his (improbably large) coat pocket for days. 
 City on Fire often reminded me of Jonathan Franzen’s first novel, The Twenty-Seventh City, an interesting book of obvious talent marred by pedestrian writing and half-baked characters. Here, the plot is more ambitious, and the style more richly lyrical, but the reader is left with a similar feeling of reading a messy early draft. The book is certainly impressive – but as a debut of remarkable promise, rather than as the masterpiece that fulfills that promise. I will look forward to Hallberg’s next novel with great anticipation, but I can’t explain the adulation that has been accorded this one. 
 
