I first read I Love Dick a few years ago. What was it? I didn’t know exactly: some kind of cult book I’d heard of via whispers from the US, where it was published in 1997. Reader, I read it, and I still wasn’t sure. An autobiography, a piece of fiction, a series of essays, a work of critical theory? 
 It tells the story of Chris, a 39-year-old “failed” video artist, married to Sylv&egrave;re, a cultural critic more than a decade her senior. When the couple visit Sylv&egrave;re’s friend, Dick, Chris conceives an unrequited passion for him, and her husband colludes with her to play it out in love letters, which Sylv&egrave;re reads, and sometimes co-writes, and which they mostly do not send. The letters proliferate into autobiographical confessions, essays on artists, rants against the position of women in the art world. 
 The eponymous “Dick” is the British academic Dick Hebdige. Sylv&egrave;re is real, too: Kraus’s ex-husband, with whom she still runs Semiotext(e), a publisher of cultural theory, avant-garde fiction and essays by authors who, like Kraus, work at the intersection of writing and art, including Kathy Acker and Gary Indiana. 
 I thought the book would be a terrifying feminist classic with a cover I might not want to be seen with on the tube. But guess what: I Love Dick is funny, very funny. Kraus’s development of her narrator persona in her subsequent novel, Torpo r, has been compared to I Love Lucy; that would be accurate had Lucy been a cerebral sometime-topless dancer and adept survivor in the New York art world. Here, Kraus introduces her “Lonely Girl Phenomenology”: “I believed I was inventing a new genre and it was secret because there was nobody to tell it to.” The book was published only a little past the heyday of critical theory, and Kraus was aware of how conceptualising and naming experience could validate it; she was also aware of the absurdity of this practice. In that spirit, I’m going to call ILD a screwball tragedy. 
 “It works in practice,” as the old poststructuralist’s joke goes, “but will it work in theory?” In the book Sylv&egrave;re and Chris have grown apart, but “maintain their intimacy via deconstruction”, what Sylv&egrave;re calls “the desire to fictionalise life”. There is a certain brand of self-flagellating confessional lit that is, it has recently been said, specifically female. An S&M aficionado, Kraus knows all about abjection, and she knows about the line between play and when it’s for real. “The game is real, or even better than real,” Chris tells Dick in her first letter, framing the book as a high-wire act of self-exposure, balanced with consummate art. “Dear Dick … I guess in a sense I’ve killed you,” Chris writes later, as her letters go beyond her own desires to become a kind of art project. 
 ILD is a joyful riposte to all those stories in which clever women fall victim to the pressures of convention – from The Yellow Wallpaper to The Bell Jar and beyond – and also to the countless books by men in which women are crushed by romantic encounters: from Madame Bovary to Anna Karenina to Laclos’s epistolatory Les Liaisons Dangereuses and Andr&eacute; Breton’s autofiction, Nadja. Equally earnest and flip, ILD balances its narrator’s yearning with the surprising empowerment the performance of her abjection brings. By giving the tragic heroine an absurd edge, Kraus is able to tackle some serious stuff. “I always believe that the rhetoric is part of a strategy,” as she told Lauren Elkin in an interview for the White Review. 
 What makes now the right moment to publish Kraus’s debut novel for the first time in the UK, after 18 years? There is a hint of retrospective gratitude: without Kraus, we might not have had the philosophers in high heels of Zoe Pilger’s Eat My Heart Out, or Susana Medina’s Philosophical Toys. Without her challenge to what she called “the ‘serious’ contemporary hetero-male novel … a thinly veiled Story of Me”, Sheila Heti might never have asked How Should a Person Be?, and Ben Lerner might never have written Leaving the Atocha Station. A whole generation of writers owes her. 
 Do you have to read critical theory to get ILD? It may help, but perhaps no more than knowing about palaeontology will help you enjoy Bringing up Baby. You can get high on the book’s passion, its humour, on the creation of a still-fresh style that not only says new things about female experience, but is able simultaneously to comment, tongue-in-cheek, on how this experience has been written, filmed and made into art. Kraus writes with an elegance that includes enough rough edges to make I Love Dick a game for real. 
 
