What do we think we know, and how, and what are we to make of it? In contemporary poetry such questions are readily to hand, but they are perhaps less often raised than taken for granted, commonplaces of postmodernity, with concomitant risks of complacency and sentimentality. Frances Leviston’s widely admired 2007 debut Public Dream showed a poet eager for challenges. What makes the best poems in Disinformation bracing and exciting is that she has further developed the power of inquiry. Poetry for her is a mode of knowledge rather than a proverbial response to a case already closed. In this Leviston draws on the inheritance of the female line in American modernism, on Marianne Moore and Elizabeth Bishop – poets to whom things were interesting in themselves, and on whom little was lost, and whose idea of order was inclusive. 
 Disinformation is particularly interesting when Leviston writes about the classical world, or what’s left of it, in which so many of our concerns were shaped. “Propylaea” visits the gateway of the Acropolis, “properly / the gate before the gate, / the entrance before the entrance, / a huge tautology // made of marble / and the old ambition / to be understood in a certain way”. Leading the reader through the gate, Leviston moves steadily towards an ambiguous grandeur. We “can feel our own // ambitions recede / then colossally resurge, / partial and imposing like the gate / before the gate, // hinged on nothing”. There is an undertow from Bishop’s “At the Fishhouses” here, but also the vertiginous comedy of William Empson ’s “Homage to the British Museum” and James Fenton ’s “The Pitt-Rivers Museum, Oxford”, poems where worldly irony proves not to offer a way out of the building. Nearby, “Athenaeum” warns: “If you fall asleep in a temple, be prepared / to wake with your ear licked clean as a conch / and the statements of the gods / suddenly cold and clear to you, suddenly a cinch” and yet, for all the isolating danger of such knowledge, the poem also invokes Minerva, goddess of wisdom: “guard our sororities that know / no better; shed blessings as we pass”. 
 Whatever form Leviston chooses, from the abbreviated sonnets of “Athenaeum” to a clipped short-lined quatrain or the rangy rhymed octets of “Woodland Burial”, she achieves a sense of decisive cleanliness, the momentum of the verse matching the steady completeness of her attention and then shifting gear at need. Unusually among younger poets, she can sustain the kind of “middle” voice practised by the later Auden and by US formalists such as Richard Wilbur and Anthony Hecht, audible here in the wry, gravely companionable “The Historical Voice”, which speaks, sharpened by counter-instinctive rhyming, “as if in exhausted agreement that we all now comprehend / the long half-life of cruelty – the love alone, however / prone it seems, can like a tiger worm live on sand. / It talks like this of love without incurring your disfavour.” 
 Elsewhere in the book Leviston takes a different, at times intently claustrophobic approach, and the effect is of a slow inundation of the page by suggestions and possibilities. “GPS”, focused on a snowstorm toy on the dashboard of a car, refuses to settle for an interpretation. Indeed the poem reads like a continual renunciation of former positions on women’s identity and desire. “IUD” depicts unease and sharp discomfort at an unavoidably invasive device: at night, “The walk-in wardrobe’s / coat-hangers cannon and tinkle, turning to hooks.” 
 Then, at the turn of a page, in “The Bridge in the Mirror” – set among the deceased reflections of a bathroom in a posh hotel – the nagging disquiets and pressures of the personal life are shown as continuous with the larger historical and political dimension that seems both inescapable and nearly impossible to get a purchase on. It is almost a relief to get civilisation over with. “Reconstruction” examines the “fabulous blueprints” left by the ruins of ancient cities when “domes cave, towers like telescopes / collapse upon themselves, the icy gate / like a berg breaks up, and hoar-frost serves as poor man’s grout”. Leviston is aware of Auden’s observation that poets are very fond of scenes of disaster and conflagration. She resists the pull of sententious generalisation by closing with an image of one of the more mundane yet definitive achievements of civilisation (and leading us back to the “flagship hotel” in “The Bridge in the Mirror”): “here, where stone buildings stood, flowing water threw out heat / in massive clouds, and the mortar circled / the known world within its embrace, where the baths lay, hot as hearts / that prize their own convenience.” 
 In an odd way, Leviston’s poem also leads on to one of Wilbur’s, his vampire poem, “The Undead”, which closes: “Think how sad it must be / To thirst always for a scorned elixir, / The salt quotidian blood // Which, if mistrusted, has no savor; / To prey on life forever and not possess it, / As rock-hollows, tide after tide, / Glassily strand the sea.” Once more the observer seems implicated in the judgment, in this case by the ability to frame it. The sober elegance and wit of such an exemplar could not be less fashionable. That’s refreshing. There are some poems in Disinformation that are too studied, too striven for, but the scope and seriousness of the book mean it should be warmly welcomed. 
 
