The bulk of Anglophone literature that initially came out of the 1990s Yugoslav civil wars consisted, naturally, of the more immediate genres: historic analyses of the Balkans, and graphic novels. Some fiction and memoir reached us in translation, including the work of Dubravka Ugrešić, Slavenka Drakulić and Semezdin Mehmedinović, but not enough. Now a generation of novelists has appeared: the last children of Yugoslavia, still close yet removed enough from the heat of collective trauma to create fresh narratives. Joining the stunning fictions of Olja Savičević, Selvedin Avdić and T&eacute;a Obreht comes a debut novel by the young American-Croatian Sara Nović. I read it in one night. 
 “The war in Zagreb began over a pack of cigarettes,” the 10-year-old narrator tells us. In the first of the novel’s four parts, tomboy Ana describes what made her world precious (parents and baby sister, her best friend Luka), and how that world collapsed in just a few months. Disintegration begins with a cancelled holiday because of road blockades; then the newsagent’s dark question about cigarettes, “Serbian or Croatian?”; the missing kid at school; the first refugees from out of town, and the appalling whispered details (one man’s wife was taken by a paramilitary with a necklace of human ears). Nović follows the lurch into total nightmare all the way to the event that terminates the first section, and Ana’s childhood. This is tough territory for any novelist, and it takes guts to go there. This key scene is written with chilling restraint: in the unspeakable moment, that crisp voice is devastating. 
 The young perspective is the novel’s principal charm, but the tone is disrupted with too many overstretched exchanges anxious to tell us things we already know. This may be a problem of balancing the emotional pitch between the solemn adult and the fresh child-narrator. But when it works, it’s terrific: “As a side effect of modern warfare, we had the peculiar privilege of watching the destruction of our country on television.” In a childish war game, “Those who died with their limbs bent in unnatural angles and could hold their positions the longest were the winners.” At her best Nović is a poet: “Summer gave way to fall in the abrupt, unbeautiful way Zagreb always changed its seasons”; and later, at university in the US, Ana’s sympathetic professor “seemed to know I was not at home in the world”. I longed for more of these perceptive asides, a sensitivity to language that is particularly striking if you read Nović’s fascinating reflections on what it’s like to be a deaf author. 
 In the next section of the book, “Somnambulist”, Ana is suddenly 20, living in the United States with adoptive parents and a false persona that begins to crack. In many ways the rest of the novel is a variation on the traditional emigrant narrative of fragmented selves, but with the added baggage of trauma. Ana’s discussions with her professor about WG Sebald reference this explicitly, though the novel doesn’t need the literary sign-posting. The American scenes are tart with tragicomedy, and Ana’s drive for psychic resolution is compelling. There are memorable set pieces involving an intellectual college boyfriend, criminally well-meaning UN workers, the pitfalls of language (“I didn’t know what soccer was, but was pleasantly surprised to find out it was football”) and the impossibility “to contain Gardenville and Croatia in the same thought”. Nović sustains the non-linear structure, and while some of the American territory is a little familiar (reminiscent of Aleksandar Hemon’s The Question of Bruno, which is no bad thing), that’s part of Ana’s sorrowful insight – once you lose what you love, the rest of the world feels a bit empty. But there is more for her to discover on her return to Croatia, including old friends and new facts about Chetniks and Ustaše in the Serbo-Croatian conflict. The attempt to extract meaning from the conflict doesn’t go further than this, but perhaps it doesn’t need to – this is Ana’s story, and she is a satisfyingly complex character of such resilience and heart that I couldn’t sleep until I had followed her to the end. 
 Nović excels at distilling visual poetry from action scenes, and there is one section in the middle that steals the show, when the shellshocked young Ana drifts into a twilight community and becomes an accidental combatant. “Suspended between living and dead”, Ana has become mute, except for the mantra: “Forward grip, gas chamber, cleaning rod, bolt, frame, magazine, function check.” Nović has breathed fire and ice into these pages. Immersing herself in the darkest materials, she has given us the real stuff dystopian fantasies are made of. 
 
