In recent years the bookshelf of graphic histories has expanded remarkably. Jacques Tardi’s It Was the War in the Trenches terrifyingly reanimates the first world war; Marjane Satrapi’s Persepolis offers insight into growing up in Iran; Joe Sacco applies an investigative journalistic ethos to Palestine and the Balkans; Li Kunwu and Philippe &Ocirc;ti&eacute;’s A Chinese Life chronicles the Cultural Revolution; Nina Bunjevac’s recent Fatherland reopens the wounds of Yugoslavia. The medium allows its amateur historians to simultaneously show and tell. 
 The Art of Flying has taken six years to land in the UK despite winning numerous awards. It evokes Spain’s complicated, cruel 20th century through the experience of the author’s father. We meet the decrepit Antonio Senior as he gives his nurses the slip and jumps from the window of his nursing home. The remainder of the book – punctuated by chapter dividers depicting the old man’s progress towards the ground – shows us the life that led to this final bid for freedom. 
 Antonio’s early years are spent in the rural backwater of Aragon, where hardscrabble farmers filch their neighbours’ land furrow by furrow, until each peasant is provoked to fortify his territory with high stone fences, trapping the hapless children inside a maze of barriers. “You see something?” asks one of the lads when his brother has clambered up a wall. “Just the wall behind it,” is the reply. 
 History hands Altarriba plenty of these metaphors on a plate, and he is only too willing to use them. Walls, barriers and allusions to flight abound, as the author details the myriad ways society and politics kept his father penned in and grounded. “We were like birds at work building our own cage,” reflects Antonio when, having exchanged backbreaking toil in the countryside for backbreaking toil in the city, he ends up doing backbreaking toil in a refugee camp. Subtle this book is not, but neither were the ideologies that tore Spain apart. You will be moved and angered and want to know what happens next. 
 If it weren’t for a few sex scenes, The Art of Flying would be an ideal book for young readers, as it wears its social and historical analysis on its sleeve. “I don’t know if you ever were an anarchist,” Antonio accuses an ex-confrere, “but now you’ve turned into the opposite. You’re selfish and greedy.” Elsewhere, a revolutionary muses: “Maybe my dedication to the cause of the workers is a form of rebellion against my family’s wealth … ” Yet the strength of Altarriba’s conviction prevents Antonio from becoming a cliche. 
 Jonathan Cape has an impressive track record with translated graphic novels but there are signs of carelessness here. The hand-lettered word balloons of the Spanish original have been replaced with a faux-handwritten typeface that sits awkwardly in the spaces. Two key documents, including a suicide note, are left untranslated. The translation, by Adrian West, has won an English PEN award but is nevertheless erratic and would have benefited from diligent copyediting. On the plus side, the art reproduction is flawless. 
 Kim’s monochrome visuals are unflashy and keenly observant. He is no Tardi but still admirably up to the challenge of rendering both the nation’s and the individual’s story. This is where good graphic histories excel: showing how ordinary people strive to ignore political upheaval even as they fall victim to it. Antonio, high on the buzz of getting his driver’s licence, barely notices the fall of the monarchy, but he is soon caught up in the tide of civil unrest and joins whichever army seems most likely to secure his dreams of an honest, happy life. 
 He is let down badly by every faction, but, with the help of kind strangers, he manages to forge an existence less hellish than the one many of his fellow travellers endure. In one powerful sequence, Uncle Segundo loses his job and he is given alternative work as a rubbish collector. The “rubbish” he must collect, however, is the corpses of murdered prisoners and revolutionaries. Antonio, to his shame, does a stint selling stolen coal to pensioners and cheating them in the bargain. “War brings out people’s inner nature,” his Uncle Le&oacute;n tells him gloomily, as the last surviving livestock piss and shit in the kitchen. 
 When history conspires to thwart a person’s every hope and yearning, relief can only be found in small acts of resistance, black humour, the consolations of art, friendship and sex, and hopes for one’s own children. The Art of Flying, heavy though its subject matter may be, is borne aloft by all these things. 
 
