Horace Walpole described Mary Wollstonecraft as a “hyena in a petticoat”; to the conservative writer Richard Polwhele she was an “unsex’d female”. A generation later, Wollstonecraft’s daughter Mary Shelley was accused of being part of a “league of incest” and a founding member of “the Satanic School”. Since their deaths, both women have been the subject of many more words than they ever wrote, and enduring interest in their turbulent personal lives is fed by a steady stream of biographies, novels and literary studies. 
 Charlotte Gordon’s Romantic Outlaws is the latest addition to this subgenre. Her chief innovation is to take the biographies of Wollstonecraft and Shelley and to intertwine them via alternating chapters, so that mother and daughter shadow and reveal each other. The retelling emphasises the extent to which Shelley’s life was shaped by her mother’s legacy: the point has been made before, but here is underlined in thought-provoking ways. 
 Both Wollstonecraft and Shelley spent their early years in complicated, tense households. Wollstonecraft’s father was a violent drunk who moved his family around as businesses folded and money ran out, and who reserved particular animus for his strong-willed eldest daughter. Her mother, worn down by an abusive husband and multiple pregnancies, spent much of her time lying on a sofa while Wollstonecraft ran the house and brought up her younger siblings. She bitterly resented the fact that her education was of far less importance than that of her brothers, and seized the first opportunity available to escape, taking a job as a lady’s companion and then as a governess before attempting to open her own school. She survived by attaching herself to families more congenial than her own, by forming intense friendships with like-minded young women, and by holding fast to her belief in her own abilities. At all times she was determined to forge an intellectually stimulating and financially independent existence for herself. 
 Shelley’s childhood was equally uneasy. Wollstonecraft died from puerperal fever 10 days after giving birth and although Shelley’s father, William Godwin, did his best to be both father and mother to Shelley and her half-sister Fanny he was quite unsuited to life as a single parent. In 1801, he married his next-door neighbour Mary Jane Vial and the girls acquired a stepmother and step-siblings. Shelley’s relationship with Mary Jane was acrimonious from the start, and tempers and tensions flared. Shelley was sent away for months at a time, first to boarding school and then to stay with friends on two separate occasions in Scotland. At 16, she too made a permanent escape, eloping to France with the radical poet Percy Shelley. 
 In the years following their breaks with the parental home both Wollstonecraft and Shelley made names for themselves in print. Wollstonecraft announced herself as “the first of a new genus” of professional woman writer by publishing Thoughts on the Education of Daughters, a volume that became Godwin’s solace and guide as he struggled alone in his early years as a widower. She honed her craft as a staff reviewer for Joseph Johnson’s Analytical Review before winning fame and some notoriety for her Vindications of the Rights of Men (1791) and of Woman (1792). Shelley erupted on to the public stage with an extraordinary novel, published in 1818 when she was 20. 
 Frankenstein reveals the influence of Wollstonecraft on Shelley at every turn and literary critics have pored over the novel for decades, trying to understand its dense network of ideas and intellectual allegiances. Gordon is more interested in the material conditions experienced by mother and daughter as they made their way in the literary world, and here the structure of Romantic Outlaws serves her well. The book’s broader argument is that the intellectual endeavours of the two women were shaped by their gender in ways that were both productive and profoundly confining. 
 Gordon keeps a close eye throughout on practical questions. Who cleaned the house? Who ordered the shopping? Who held the baby? Shelley was a mother at 18 and the mistress of a sizable house at 21; Wollstonecraft remained free of such responsibilities until her early 30s. The sections of Romantic Outlaws set when both women are in their 20s are therefore particularly valuable. We see Wollstonecraft among the philosophers, arguing away the evenings in the company of brilliant men, at the heart of a wide social circle. She goes where she pleases and writes what she wants, untrammelled by domestic ties. 
 Shelley’s existence, in contrast, is centred on a claustrophobic circle of husband, stepsister and children, and it is their needs that direct her peripatetic progress across Europe in the second half of the 1810s. Some may object to the insistence with which Gordon categorises the author of Frankenstein as mother first, writer second, and it is perhaps debatable whether she spent as much of each day dandling a baby as Gordon suggests. There is, however, something refreshing about an account of women’s lives that demonstrates the relentlessness of housekeeping and childrearing. Seen in this light, Shelley’s achievements appear even more remarkable, so that the emphasis on the domestic endows Romantic Outlaws with the rigorously feminist framework that is its best quality. 
 The lives of both women were shaped by their relationships with men. Wollstonecraft was driven to despair and attempted suicide by absent lovers and romantic rejection, and her search for emotional salvation prompted some of her most brilliantly furious writing about the plight of women. Shelley’s story was intertwined with that of her husband Percy from the moment of her elopement: even after his death he remained the dominant figure in her life. Both women had to work out how to stand alone, and in Gordon’s narrative they appear at their best and bravest as they do so. In her long widowhood, Shelley was compelled to suppress every whiff of sexual scandal in her own story as she battled for economic survival; after her death, Wollstonecraft’s critics attempted to use such scandal to silence her. It is a tactic that remains much in evidence against outspoken women today: a reminder, if any were needed, that the movement Wollstonecraft fostered remains as urgent and important as it was during her daughter’s lifetime. 
 There is therefore much in the gender politics of Romantic Outlaws to admire, but its prose verges on the pedestrian. Gordon is at her strongest when she allows her subjects to speak freely, unconstrained by other voices. “I here thrown down my gauntlet,” Wollstonecraft wrote in A Vindication of the Rights of Woman. Reform the position of women, she argued, and you “reform the world”. She was right in 1792 and she is right now. 
 
