If, as the aphorist once quipped, wisdom in the young is as unattractive as frivolity in the elderly, young poets have a tough gig. In our culture there is a premium placed on youth, but the truth is that in any generation there are only a handful of voices worth listening to: poets who – through disposition, intellect, circumstance, commitment to their art and the odd stroke of luck – write those few poems that ring true and refuse to be forgotten. Great poems are as likely to be penned by a 30-year-old as a 70-year-old. Faber’s New Poets series provides mentorship, financial support and pamphlet publication to four previously unpublished poets. Its first two outings paved the way for talents such as Fiona Benson and Sam Riviere. Now it is the turn of this latest four to receive the mixed blessing of heightened critical scrutiny, public attention and general promotion afforded to few debutants. 
 At 25, Rachael Allen is the youngest: a fact that helps explain her poetry’s up-to-the-minute contemporaneity, alternative humour, and occasional shoulder-shrugging cool. Dotted throughout her short collection is a series of poems that takes its cues from the internet-meme-generating 4chan website: “Random”, “Cute/Male”, “Social”. If that means nothing to you, you’re not alone. But while these conversational snapshots are littered with in-jokes and non sequiturs, they also transcend their specifics, to grapple with universals such as love, loss and childhood nostalgia. It makes for moving, often funny reading: “the tacky smell of sweets that could have been lipgloss” at a time when “Gina G was the pathway to enlightenment”. Allen’s is a sceptical, droll outlook, but she isn’t afraid of occasional profundity. “Early Harbour” is a painfully beautiful lyric that charts difficult waters, while “Goonhilly” casts a wry eye over our past lives, making the eponymous telecommunications site a metaphor for life’s chances and choices: “She asks about radar and you will conclude it is dangerous / … isn’t anything we can’t see?” 
 Departing from more prevalent lyric styles, it is Declan Ryan’s propensity for character portraits and epistles that makes his poems stand out. Both retain a rhythmic integrity, impressive given their prosaic features: the former incorporating reportage and found material; the latter, a conversational tone detailing the domestic, bordering on the mundane. At its best, there is an unshowy candidness to such writing. “Postcard from Australia” is especially delicate, confessing “I can’t wait until Tuesday means the same / for both of us again”. It reads as if there were only ever one recipient in mind, but this is part of its emotional power as an overheard intimacy. In the end, though, it is two telling tributes to pop culture figures that linger. “The Exaltation of Saint John Coltrane” re-envisions the legendary jazz saxophonist’s music as invocatory, while in “Ethiopia Shall Stretch Forth Her Hands”, deft description of heavyweight boxer Joe Louis’s fighting style transforms him into a figurehead of Pan-Africanism: “He will never gloat over a fallen opponent. / He will live and fight clean”. 
 The biographical note to Ryan’s pamphlet makes clear his affinity with Ian Hamilton. But it is a fellow debutant, Will Burns, who tends to stylistically recall Hamilton. His minimalist, emotionally sparse yet precise lyrics are most at home with the “dirty fingernails” and “dulled reddish-brown” rust of a life of simple graft – or at least the idealised, uncomplicated promise of one. Recalling trout seen from the riverbank, one poem declares “I had wanted / to catch one and kill it”, before concluding: “There / was just life and death / and a fire in my mind”. “The canvas bag / just sits there, full of tools / that are old and rusted” laments another; a desire for an atavistic masculinity, unchallenged by our modern world’s complexities, seems to underpin Burns’s writing. “Strawweight” is a hymn to a fighting grandfather, once “fast enough his fists blew out the lamps”, his glory days now “gone like a day’s work”. However slight and deceptively simple Burns’s poetry may appear, those who drink deep will be rewarded by its quiet intelligence and subtle ways of seeing. 
 “It’s the close-by things I’m lost to say,” writes Zaffar Kunial in “Hill Speak”, a poem about his father’s Kashmiri dialect. It encapsulates Kunial’s obsession with uncertainty, and the gaps that language creates both between and within. His dual identity may be at the heart of his work – the River Jhelum, rhododendrons and Kashmir’s mountains jostle with the Lake District, Shakespeare and cricket – but it is a Paul Muldoon -like tendency towards wild connection-making and linguistic play that defines it: “spider trees” like “the withered veil at Miss Havisham’s house”; the mysterious provenance of the Three Hares motif, “catchable as Scotch mist”. These are poems that attempt to enact the seriously playful thinking they encourage. “Fielder”, perhaps the most memorable piece, has the poet happiest “bumbling about”, “having chased a lost cause, leathered for six”. “I hope you’re with me on this”, pleads the speaker in “Us”, “I hope, from here on / out, I’ll say it and not be too far wrong”. Kunial’s simpatico persona and sense of mischief will likely win admirers. 
 
