Matt Sumell ’s novel-in-short-stories starts in familiar territory. The protagonist is a thirtyish loser who drinks too much and stumbles comically in his attempts to pick up women. He tells his life story in a hyper-masculine vernacular that relies on obscenity for its punch lines. One might wonder if we need another book exploring a landscape so thickly covered in footprints. But Making Nice has an anarchic humour and a goofy, ingenuous humanity that makes every page feel new. 
 When we first meet the protagonist, Alby, he’s punching his sister in the course of an argument about whether or not pots can be put in the dishwasher. The violence is slapstick, and Alby pauses the scene to offer a numbered list of excuses for the punch. The silly/brutal argument (Alby threatens to “punch [his sister’s] moustache off her face and watch it fly across the room like a hairy bug”, then mimes the flying insect) sets the tone for all the silly/brutal dialogues. This scene also introduces the subtext of every story: Alby’s depressive loserdom and its immediate cause, his mother’s recent death from cancer. 
 In the course of the book, Alby will punch several more people, attempt to drown a member of his family, and insult every women he meets. Every story is about a failure. The cause is always the same: Alby’s depression-fuelled rage. Everything is played for laughs, and everything draws Alby back to memories of his mother’s death. 
 At first, this repetition can feel frustrating. There’s a lot of action, but no forward motion. But the stasis is the point here; one of the stories is entitled “All Lateral”, after Alby’s tendency to only move sidewards in life and never find a step up. It’s about a common human predicament: Alby can’t escape the angry absurdity of his own character. 
 That character is often brutish and deliberately disgusting, but marked by fits of intense compassion. In one scene, Alby saves a grasshopper that has jumped into a toilet he’s just pissed in, then ponders whether he has interrupted a suicide. Could a grasshopper’s life be bad enough to make it want to kill itself? He concludes, “I was pretty sure the answer to that question, no matter the animal, is yes.” In another episode, Alby rescues a baby bird so young “its skin was almost see-through … [it] looked like a dog’s heart with a bird’s head stuck on”. He devotes weeks to tending the chick, and, hoping to make the bird a survivor, tries to teach it violence by showing it YouTube videos of eagles throwing goats off cliffs and dolphins raping snorkellers. He imagines it’s a falcon that will grow up to terrorise the neighbourhood with slaughters and sex attacks. Clearly the bird is a proxy for Alby, who wants to recast his hypersensitive tantrums as kick-ass villainy – but it turns out to be a female cardinal who refuses to be weaned off handouts. 
 The role of Alby’s family is one of the most remarkable aspects of Making Nice. They are Alby’s only intimates, and although his relationships with them are conducted primarily in insults, their solidarity is absolute. He can’t connect to anyone else, but for his father and his siblings, he is capable of unconditional love. In the context of his childish rage, this never stops being surprising, and thus never loses its power to move. 
 In what is possibly the defining scene, Alby remembers being 14, when his mother was still alive. He’s drinking his first beer in the snowy backyard, watching his family gather inside the house for dinner. “They were all there and they were waiting for me, and we were going to have dinner together and tell one another stories from our great day … I watched them and drank, and just as everything was starting to feel soft and warm the wind gusted the snow sideways off the roof and the pine trees and the ground, whirling the world white.” 
 This isn’t a flawless book. Some jokes land clumsily; some blunder into a moment of emotion and cheapen it. But those that land well aren’t just funny, they are insightful and unexpected and hilarious. The emotional moments that work are exceptional for their generosity. An exceptional but flawed book is better than a mediocre but perfect one; in its rampage to nowhere, Making Nice achieves the remarkable feat of making it feel better to travel hopelessly than to arrive. 
 
