Ask readers of poetry to name two major living practitioners associated with the Midlands and they would probably mention the markedly contrasting figures of Roy Fisher and Geoffrey Hill. Fisher grew up in Birmingham and Hill (like Housman ) in Bromsgrove. In both poets’ work can be traced the interpenetration of urban and rural environments and habits of thought that characterises places haphazardly industrialised in the 19th century. Fisher has given a brilliantly condensed account of this experience in his memoir “Antebiography” in his indispensable prose selection An Easily Bewildered Child (Shearsman, 2014). Tony Williams, in whom the influence of both poets can be traced (Fisher’s the more strongly), is an inheritor of this complex history. Like Fisher he sees a highly specified provincial context through a Modernist lens; like Hill he also moves among older elements of poetic tradition, with Wordsworth and Marvell particularly important to him. 
 Williams is from Derbyshire, and his Midlands is really the region’s northern borderlands – the Peak District and Sheffield. Just as it is said that no two residents could agree where the Black Country begins and ends, so Williams’s place wavers and shifts. It is also a terrain of the imagination: somehow it draws strength from the very uncertainty of its existence. The region fades off into the east across the line of the “half-arsed A1” near Newark. The traveller pauses at the aptly named “OK Diner”, where the waitress’s difficulty in pronouncing “guacamole” is both comic and shaming to the narrator. Class, innocence and a remote ordinariness provide a raw example of what Jo Shapcott called “the complicated shame of Englishness”. We are, Williams suggests, “unable to curb / the sarcasm that lames our dreams”. He is also drawn irresistibly to the glum half-life of “Half-Day Closing” in one of those arrested settlements where half of us grew up and it remains implacably 1957. 
 Williams might be also a pastoral poet were enclosure not everywhere apparent. “But tell me, who are these travellers?” written in tetrameter couplets that nod to Marvell’s, applies Rilke’s question to a rewriting of Edward Thomas ’s “Lob”. Where Thomas pursues a half-legendary embodiment of rural England, Williams infers an unseen tribe as likely to be vandals as ecologists. They “hang the moles on barbs as proof / of vagrant, muddy-trousered truth” but at the same time “leave their condoms blossoming / among the cowslips all around”. 
 Williams’s typical inclination is to evoke a category (for example, a half-idealised rural space) and then complicate it. His ambiguous travellers can be enlisted in the cause of sentimentality (“those who think of coming back / are always and already home”) or encourage people to leave the land and “help those villagers to reach / the ceaseless, tram-infested streets / of cities, new and obsolete”. A weird shift seems to occur here, making the poem’s apparent present suddenly historical and in turn suggesting that to dismantle a myth may involve reassembling the parts in a different order. There are moments when the fecundity of the image-making and the unexpected shifts of emphasis produce a clotted, overcrowded effect, but there is a consistent sense that something urgent is at stake – in part an inquiry into what the imaginative polity of England might now be. 
 It is difficult to write about the rural landscape without a move towards the transcendent. Williams’s approach is characteristically thoughtful. The beautiful “Derwent” has in mind the river that flows from the Peak District through Derby to the Trent, rather than its Cumbrian, Northumbrian or Yorkshire namesakes. “There is a reason rivers share their names, / But it is not that the rivers are one. Each river / is its own region happening again.” He creates a gliding movement akin to some of Ted Hughes ’s river writings, as, in a strangely satisfying manner, the poem empties itself of human claims: “Others will hear / the river’s calm involuntary seething, / and they will answer the challenge you have failed. / They will fail it too. That does not matter: / there are others coming, always themselves and listening, running, / rivers returning to the open and generous sea.” 
 The Midlands is also a book of considerable diversity, disinclined to play safe. There are strange arias such as “Stone Pigsties” and “The Shadow of Arms and Legs”, which show an affinity with the neglected northern master Peter Didsbury. There are dramatic monologues and a letter from a rhino to a hippo, and a poem about a photocopier that will seem unarguably true to anyone who has ever had dealings with one of the accursed things: “There is a smell of burning. You have forgotten the code, / you are out of paper, of staples, of toner, of patience / and when the noise comes to tell you the bastard is jammed / you reach into the hedge to pluck at a tight and pristine rose / as if silence in Eden is what you’re assaulting in wanting / one each of this miserable sheet for the meeting.” 
 In all, Williams’s second full collection shows him to be a poet of great resourcefulness, as unimpressed by the thin gruel of the merely fashionable as by the obvious and tried and tested. Part of his task, rarely stated but pursued with great energy and invention, is to affirm that the aesthetic and the political form a unified field. All power to his elbow. 
 
