I first tried to read Bellow in high school. Him With His Foot in His Mouth was lying around, and I picked it up. And put it down again. Something about the writing seemed phoney to me. The language was too much like the language of my parents’ friends, articulate academic types who finished all their sentences grammatically but also liked to mix in pop-culture slang. I didn’t like the way they talked. These were people professionally selected for their ability to be “interesting” on any subject, whether they knew what they were talking about or not. 
 Then in my 20s I read The Adventures of Augie March. It was like being dunked on in basketball for the first time. (Which I also remember: Julian Austin took a step past me and when he rose up, it was like nothing was holding on to his legs, he just kept rising.) I didn’t know you could do it like that. The phoniness didn’t bother me or it was gone; maybe I had more sympathy for it now. Here was a writer, like Henry James, who gave you proof (who needs it?) that there are intelligences out there greater than your own. They also offer a glimpse of the subtlety with which life can be lived. 
 Among the writers, journalists and editors I knew in London (most of them men, it should be said), Bellow was the acknowledged God. (“One doesn’t, after all, defend one’s god,” one of James’s narrators said. “One’s god is himself a defence.”) One of the things that seems to change over time is how writers try to win. Look at a page of Austen, a page of Dickens, a page of Hemingway or Munro, and you get a vivid sense of the different ways they keep score – how the points get counted. Line by line, Bellow is pretty hard to beat. You can feel the competitive thrust behind every sentence, and not just in the famous opening of Augie March (“I am an American, Chicago-born – Chicago, that sombre city …”). He seems to be saying something like this: I can out-describe, out-characterise, out-philosophise, out-dialogue you. In case this makes his books sound like an ice-hockey fight, the one where a game broke out, he can also do other things: out-ironise you, out-smart, out‑sympathise, out-deprecate. 
 But there are also holes in his swing. Bellow wrote big books and small books, but we rarely remember him for his plots, the carefully constructed sequence of events that stands for something larger than itself. His women also come under a certain amount of scrutiny. Most of his characters tend to sound alike. The baseball season is 160-plus games long – if there’s a hole, the pitchers will exploit it. Writing is like that, too. You have to make everything from scratch, and that includes not just plot and character, but economics, philosophical truth, gender relations, various kinds of professional expertise, weather and interior design, etc. If there are any of these areas in which you’re a little weak, you can try to write around them – but you’ll probably be found out. 
 From scratch isn’t quite right. Much of the material, especially for a writer such as Bellow, comes from the life lived, which is what makes Zachary Leader’s new biography so interesting to a Bellow fan. The novels and stories play a big part, not just because they helped to shape their author’s career, but because they offer evidence, of a very intimate but unreliable kind, about what was happening in his private life. Leader’s idea seems to be that if you lay the various fictions on top of each other, palimpsest-style, the repetitions and approximations will produce a reasonably good image of the truth – there will be a kind of darkening towards fact. Which strikes me as very reasonable. Of course, you need to be a good reader, to align the fictions in the right way and make the right adjustments. Not just subtle, but sensible, too – and Leader is both. 
 He’s also very even-handed about Bellow’s writing. The question that frames the book is the one Bellow asked his old friend Eugene Goodheart on his deathbed. “As he slipped in and out of consciousness, Bellow opened his eyes … and asked: ‘Was I a man or was I a jerk?’” By “man”, Leader comments, Bellow meant mensch – a decent human being. There may be a slight stretch here. Bellow himself seems perfectly capable of saying mensch, and man has different overtones; it’s not quite the opposite of jerk. In any case, the body of the biography provides a pretty complete answer to Bellow’s question, as far as it goes (which is up to 1964, when Bellow was 50, and had just published Herzog ). It can be summed up like this: yes on both counts. 
 Bellow was not the first, but he was one of the earlier and most dominant of the Jewish writers who played such a big part in 20th-century American literature. There’s a line you can draw from Singer, through Bellow, to Roth and Chabon and Safran Foer. Bellow himself was not Chicago-born – he moved there when he was nine – but he was the only kid in his family to be born on North American soil, in Lachine, Canada, now incorporated into Montreal. Leader writes very well about his family history, his father, Abraham, and mother, Liza, who lived well but illegally in St Petersburg, with “servants, coachmen, fine linens”, until Abraham was arrested and imprisoned, possibly for selling forged papers. “A Jew who wanted to make a living in Russia in 1905, certainly a good living, would be unlikely to get anywhere if he obeyed the law.” Eventually he escaped, and the family made its way to Canada, and then Chicago, where Abraham got involved in the bakery business. 
 Even in North America, the Bellows didn’t always stick to the letter of the law. Abraham ran a moonshine operation in Lachine (badly). When the Bellows moved to Chicago in 1924, the neighbourhood Saul grew up in had a ghetto liveliness that played a big part in his later fiction. His brothers worked as “what we used to call hustlers. They sold papers in the streets, peddled chocolate bars on the commuter trains.” Bellow tried his luck in the same line, less successfully. But he also hung out at the public library, where the books were stained by “soup or cocoa or tears” and he rubbed shoulders with the other “autodidacts, loafers, compulsives”, as Leader puts it. Already Bellow wanted to be a great writer. 
 Part of the transformation the biography describes has to do with the way the Jewish writer has climbed up the class-ladder of American life. Bellow once said in an interview, about Jewish immigrants, “The distortions they suffered in Americanising themselves also charged them with a certain energy.” In Philip Roth’s Goodbye, Columbus, Mr Patimkin asks Neil Klugman, the Roth alter-ego, if he knows what gonif means – thief. You have to have a little gonif in you to make it in business. Klugman knows, but Patimkin’s kids don’t – and even in Klugman’s case, the only thing he understands is the Yiddish word. Bellow, though no businessman, knew both Yiddish and thieves, and his fiction is full of what he calls “the reality-instructors”, who try to tell you about the way the world actually works. 
 Roth, in an interview with Bellow, remarked that “the real thing the Jews did in America, their great, their real genius and success, was in business … [and] that’s what’s at the heart of your book [ Augie March ], which is the small-time lawyers, the owners of the middle-sized businesses, the conniving and cheating. You were not ashamed of Jewish aggression because you saw it as American aggression … It was Chicago aggression.” Augie March was the breakthrough – at least that’s how the story goes. Bellow was living in Paris on a Guggenheim fellowship, and working on another novel, a dead end, when the idea came to him. In the mornings, street cleaners “opened the hydrants a bit and let water run along the curbs … I seem then to have gone back to childhood in my thoughts and remembered a pal of mine whose surname was August – a handsome, freewheeling kid who used to yell out when we were playing checkers, ‘I got a scheme!’” 
 In fact, breakthrough seems a slight exaggeration; it suggests a level of struggle and failure not met by the facts; his first novel, Dangling Man, won the National book award. But Bellow himself was attached to the idea of Augie as a breakthrough – or breakaway, from the kind of European high-art novel he had learned to admire as a kid. He once described writing Augie as “holding buckets under a waterfall”. The words just came, as if he had found a new voice by speaking his own language for the first time. But even in stylistic terms the connection with his previous books is easy to see. Dangling Man and Augie begin in very similar ways, with an idiosyncratic, muscular first-person narrator angrily explaining himself, showing off his book smarts and street-learning at the same time. The big difference is really in terms of plot – where Dangling Man and The Victim circle inwards, Augie streams outwards, from adventure to adventure. 
 Bellow’s life, in this respect, began to imitate his fiction. When he wrote Augie he was still married to his first wife, Anita, a social worker, and the mother of his first child. After the novel’s success, the affairs began to multiply. On this front, the link between Roth and Bellow turned out to be personal as well as literary. When Roth was 23, a promising grad student at the University of Chicago, his girlfriend Susan Glassman approached Bellow after a reading. “Turned out to be the best thing that ever happened to me,” Roth wrote, “and the worst thing that ever happened to Saul. I was so young it never even occurred to me that a man of 40 would be interested in a woman of 23.” Bellow eventually married her, in the aftermath of his bitter divorce from Sasha, his second wife. 
 That divorce is really the subject of Herzog, generally considered to be Bellow’s best book. Both the novel and the backstory offer a great deal of material for someone who wants to answer Bellow’s question, “Was I a man or was I a jerk?” Sasha was working the phones at the Partisan Review when Bellow met her. They continued to see each other in Nevada, where Bellow had moved to speed up his first divorce. Then they got married themselves, had a kid, and he took a job at Bard College, in upstate New York, before moving to the University of Minnesota. Meanwhile, Sasha had started an affair with his colleague Jack Ludwig, who followed the Bellows (with his own wife and child) to Minnesota. Ludwig was acting the part of Bellow’s confidant, counselling Saul about his marriage. When it ended, Bellow couldn’t figure out why. This, more or less, is the plot of Herzog. A dreamy academic type gets played by his wife and best friend and has to recover something, his sanity, or optimism, in the aftermath. 
 Herzog was a bestseller, won lots of prizes, but it also attracted its fair share of criticism, sometimes from writers who had known Sasha and the history behind the novel. Madeleine, the Sasha figure, “resembles no real or imaginable person”, wrote Stanley Hyman in the New Leader. Irving Howe, in the New Republic, said that “the portrait is unjust, an utter libel, but a classic of male retaliation”. The book glosses over Bellow’s own affairs, and doesn’t touch on Sasha’s disputed accusation that he was physically violent towards her. But his real sin in the marriage seems different – that he wasn’t paying attention, or was paying the wrong kind of attention. There’s a famous and extraordinarily vivid scene in the book where Herzog watches his wife put on makeup, but the vividness is achieved at the expense of intimacy. By the time Madeleine has finished putting on her face, she isn’t quite human any more – which also means that we can’t really feel what Herzog has lost by losing her. In life, the expert noticer went over a year without noticing that his wife and best friend were sleeping together. 
 One of his students, the writer William Kennedy, remembers some of his literary advice: “Bellow … talked about being prodigal. He said a writer shouldn’t be parsimonious with his work, but ‘prodigal, like nature’.” You can hear in this advice the lessons he learned writing Augie March. But it applies to his life, too. The kid from Lachine came a long way, wrote a lot of books, had many affairs and wives, moved around endlessly, ended up as a bigshot intellectual on the University of Chicago’s committee on social thought. The books, essentially, give an exhilarating picture of all this movement – they make it sound like a kind of existential seriousness. You have to be open to everything. And Bellow was open to a lot of crackpot stuff, Reichian therapy, orgasmatrons, anthroposophy. While he was kicking his heels in Nevada, waiting for a divorce to come through, an old Mormon missionary “clapped me on the back, as we sat talking, and gripped me by the leg. As any man in his right mind naturally wants to be saved, I listened attentively.” But he wanted to be saved by women, too, and Leader sometimes struggles to keep pace with the extent of his affairs. 
 It’s a terrific biography. It’s also a first-rate piece of literary criticism. The book doesn’t really privilege the life or the fiction, or belittle the complexity of reading between them. But taken together they offer a very detailed kind of evidence, about the costs and benefits of Bellow’s existential intensity. Like Byron, he learned a lot of tolerance by having to put up with himself. He could be generous (especially towards other writers, whose work he read and recommended) and petty, too, fair and unjust, delusional and painfully self-aware. As a writer and a human, he seems like a dangerous model to follow. But then you open up one of his books again, and there he is on the page, out-describing, out-sympathising, out-profounding you … The Life of Saul Bellow 
 
