The physicist Richard Feynman once remarked that “philosophy of science is about as useful to scientists as ornithology is to birds”. Some of his colleagues have not been so kind. When Stephen Hawking pronounced philosophy dead in 2011, it was only the fame of the coroner that made it news. 
 Good scientists, however, are willing to revise their theories on the basis of new data, and Tim Lewens’s wonderful addition to the excellent Pelican Introductions series, The Meaning of Science, is all the evidence any open-minded inquirer needs to demonstrate the worth of philosophy of science. 
 Those who dismiss the subject usually misunderstand it. They think either that philosophy of science is an armchair pursuit – woolly metaphysics instead of hard physics – or they think the job of philosophy of science is to help train scientists do their job. Although some scientists have indeed been helped by doing some philosophy, that is not the litmus test of its value. What philosophy brings to science is an understanding of what it means, intellectually, practically, politically and ethically. 
 Lewens first turns his attention to what science is and what it tells us: does it describe the world as it really is, or does it merely provide useful models to help us to manipulate it? Does it make progress, or are the theories of any age destined to be shed one by one, like a snake’s skin? Is there a clear, rigorous “scientific method” or just an ad-hoc hodgepodge of various techniques? 
 Lewens discusses these issues with admirable clarity and even-handedness. He takes a sober look at issues of truth and progress, challenging both the naive and the cynical along the way. This measured approach is best exemplified in his explanation of why the scientific method is not as neat and robust as some popular versions of it suggest. While it is central to science that its theories are based on evidence and can be tested, there is a great deal of judgment required when deciding which experiments are critical or what evidence is decisive. There is no method you can simply follow that will determine these issues for you. Breakthroughs often occur because scientists are too bloody-minded to give up on their ideas in the face of unpromising results. As Lewens writes: “Sometimes scientists, like horses, progress best when their blinkers are on.” 
 In the second half of the book, he looks at what science means for us in practice. In a world where scientific advisers guide evidence-based policy, his careful discussion of these issues is much needed. From GM crops to antidepressive drugs, there is a lot of public scepticism that science is never value-free, that authorities cherry-pick the research that suits their interests, with scientists themselves all too often willing to find what their paymasters want them to find. 
 Lewens is too clear-sighted to deny all credibility to such claims. He gives several examples of how ideology and vested interests have skewed science, most notably in Stalin’s Russia. Trofim Lysenko championed a bogus biology that denounced the established view of genetics as a bourgeois and capitalist lie designed to hide the fact that the genetic stock of children could be improved by how their parents lived. Despite the superficial similarity to what is now understood as epigenetics, Lysenko’s theories had no scientific basis. This had terrible consequences not just for Soviet agriculture, which for many years was hindered by Lysenkian “improvements”, but also for scientists who lost their jobs and sometimes even their lives for opposing his official line. 
 The moral of this story, however, is not that values must be kept completely out of science, since that is neither possible nor desirable. Lewens illuminates this with a deft and subtle discussion of Marx and Engels’s critique of the theory of evolution, which they believed was influenced by the bourgeois economic assumptions of its creator. Lewens argues that, in a sense, they were right, but this was not a fatal objection. Darwin’s thinking may well have been shaped by his capitalist assumptions, but his theory stands on its merits. Value-laden thinking can give rise to ideas that rise above their origins. 
 Values are also vital when deciding when to act on scientific knowledge. Lewens makes a convincing case that there can be no such thing as a one-size-fits-all standard of proof for scientific findings. On some occasions it is prudent to withhold judgment until the case is as close to watertight as possible; on others a precautionary principle means we should act even when firm proof is lacking. This means that we should sometimes rush to use new technologies and at other times be very cautious before doing so. Potentially life-saving drugs, for example, should be used before we know for sure whether they work, if there is no other cure. On the other hand, there is no need to risk approving a new industrial chemical that might possibly be harmful when the only gains from doing so are marginal improvements. 
 If impartiality is a cardinal scientific virtue, Lewens is a fine exemplar of it. He is an enthusiastic advocate of science, but that does not stop him being appropriately sceptical of the more uncritical claims made for it. He is rightly wary of the kind of “scientific imperialism” that tries to explain every aspect of human life in scientific terms. His book is a reminder that there is always an intellectual division of labour and to turn over too much to science just because it has played its part well is as daft as asking a concert pianist to follow up a sonata with a clarinet concerto. 
 Too many guides for novices are pedestrian trudges through the key names and topics in a subject. Like the best introductions, this is more manifesto than textbook, making a convincing case for its subject by explaining why it is both important and interesting. There is no better, clearer case for why both science and philosophy matter and why neither can replace the other. 
 
