Bright, warm, spicy, sexy, “exotic” – these aren’t among the first adjectives you’d reach for to describe England, pictured in cliche as a drizzly isle of pallid people and dreary food. But “exotic England” is no oxymoron, argues Yasmin Alibhai-Brown. A Ugandan Asian who came to England in 1972, she sees England with an “insider/outsider” perspective that’s “fresh and may even be necessary” to understanding it. What she sees in Exotic England is a country that “was, is and will be fascinated and constantly altered by its encounters with the ‘Other’.” 
 The book reads like Alibhai-Brown’s love letter to a partner of more than 40 years, whose faults she knows intimately, yet whom she adores nonetheless. For all the cliches (and, in places, reality) of provincial conservatism, “England,” she observes, “is uniquely susceptible to eastern civilisations”. Asia and the Middle East, she shows, have long inflected English tastes, ideas, architecture, populations and politics. Wedgwood mass-produced pottery with Chinese-style designs, Liberty made Indian-inspired chintz. When the ex-sepoy Dean Mohammed opened Britain’s first curry house in Brighton in 1809, he could not have predicted that there would be an Indian restaurant in just about every English town today. It is especially interesting in light of current events to read about a series of English converts to Islam, who numbered about 1,000 at the turn of the last century, and supported the construction of Britain’s first purpose-built mosque, in Woking, in 1889. 
 Alibhai-Brown brings a terrific sense of purpose to the book, aiming “to initiate a more nuanced, unbiased conversation”. The result has the curious, earnest quality of some BBC Radio 4 documentaries. You can almost hear her talking you through her discoveries, interspersed with quotes from interviews she has held with “experts and thinkers” such as Neil MacGregor, Simon Schama and Kwasi Kwarteng. They tell her that they “all have many identities and … being English doesn’t stop you being other things”, and that a “nebulousness” about identity “has enabled the English to absorb new cultures and influences with fluid ease”. 
 This chatty tone makes Exotic England easy to read, but it feels about as substantive as small talk at a dinner party. A rather anecdotal approach to evidence doesn’t help. To show how the English have been exceptionally open to eastern ideas, and how English is an exceptionally rich language in which to express them, she points to Jim Al‑Khalili, “son of an English mother and Iraqi father”, who “makes obscure scientific information comprehensible in the most poetic way”. To illustrate how the English make an exceptional habit of falling love with “exotic” women and men, she holds up Princess Diana, who had two “infidel lovers”. To show England’s exceptional “internationalism”, she points to David Beckham, who “has covered most of his skin with tattoos, like a gorgeous African nomadic warrior”. 
 Arguing that something is exceptional requires a strong understanding of what counts as normal, and what the range of alternatives might be. Exotic England doesn’t pull it off. Norman Davies tells Alibhai-Brown that English imperialists were “conscious of their limitations and felt they had to know other people, cooperate with locals. French and Spanish imperialists did not do that, they behaved very differently.” But it was the French, not the British, who first raised armies of Indian troops, and the primary way the Spanish differed from the British was by systematically intermixing with indigenous women. As for the distinctiveness of the English as opposed to the British experience, Rory Stewart reminds Alibhai-Brown that it was actually the Scots (and the Irish) who disproportionately manned the British empire. Undaunted, she insists that “the English encircled the world with a steely grip and in the process were mystified and transformed … Anglo-Saxons are made that way.” 
 To argue that “Anglo-Saxons are made” like anything flirts perilously with a racial or genetic determinism, which I’m sure is the last thing Alibhai-Brown wants to imply. The truth is that whatever is truly distinctive in the British or English encounter with “the east” can’t be identified in a clutch of anecdotes, still less in airy assertions about temperament. It will be found, chiefly, by probing the long historical experience of imperialism, framed by particular institutions, ideas, beliefs, markets and cultural forms. Some, but not all of them, were more strongly located in England than Scotland, Wales or Ireland. Some, but not all of them, were more distinctive in the British Isles than in continental Europe, the US, Japan or elsewhere. 
 So why fight so hard, even in the face of evidence, for the distinctiveness of England? In a word, Ukip. Surveying the present state of political affairs, Alibhai-Brown asks: “What kind of England will emerge in the coming years? Will it become soulless, colourless, mean, closed off and small? Or will it choose … to be open, big, international, roving and curious, easy with diversity because it always has been?” She hopes that England will “come to understand and embrace its modern self and its rich, cosmopolitan history.” I strongly support this objective. Perhaps ironically, a more rigorous and compelling argument can be made not by looking at interactions with Britain’s former “exotic” colonies, but by considering Britain in relation to its European or American neighbours. 
 One good place to see British (including English) distinctiveness would be in the “settler colonies” of the Americas and the antipodes. Unlike the French, Spanish, Dutch and Portuguese, Britons in the 19th century emigrated so programmatically and in such large numbers as to shape what historian James Belich has called an “anglo-world”, and to establish English as the global lingua franca. Meanwhile, Britain (including England) became a haven for refugees and asylum seekers who could be assured of greater liberties of person and speech than in most continental nations. A tour of this England could stop at the Huguenot churches in London’s Spitalfields, the art galleries filled with Van Dycks and Canalettos, the house where Francisco de Miranda plotted the liberation of Spanish America, Karl Marx’s desk at the British Library, and the grave of Joseph Conrad (born J&oacute;zef Korzeniowski) in Canterbury. It could even stop at the Woking mosque, whose construction was spearheaded by a Hungarian Jew. 
 White immigration and emigration has triggered plenty of contention, even violence. Just ask the largest group of immigrants into 19th-century Britain – the Irish – or the indigenous peoples decimated by European settlement. Anxieties about European (notably Jewish) immigrants prompted restrictions such as the 1905 Aliens Act, at a time when non-white imperial subjects appeared relatively unthreatening, because subordinated. Such conflicts only make this history all the more salient for understanding and pushing back against the rise of Ukip today. 
 Alibhai-Brown is certainly right that England is full of “Otherness”. But there’s a big difference between what you call “Other” and what you call “exotic”. If something is exotic, it may be edgy, but it’s domesticated, safe for consumption – exotic pets, plants, flavours. You’re not likely to hear anyone call radical Islam “exotic”, let alone the eastern European workers in Ukip’s sights. The question facing English voters next month (the English in particular within the UK) isn’t whether they can embrace the “exotic”; it’s whether the majority can accept the “Other” that still appears threatening to some. I share Alibhai-Brown’s hope that they will. 
 
