My favourite character in James Hannaham ’s Delicious Foods is crack. Crack, which calls itself Scotty, gets its own show in this multivocal novel, narrates entire chapters. Scotty is what they used to call a boon companion. Life is just better when he’s around, with his sly jokes and hypnotic cadences. And sometimes he even seems wise. “I told Darlene,” he writes, “that the whole problem of humanity is that if you got a body, you gotta have a time and a place. But when y’all got a time and a place, y’all really don’t got shit – time don’t do nothing but disappear.” 
 I’m not sure if my eagerness to get back to Scotty is akin to addiction, precisely. But it certainly suggests something of what one hears is the overall effect. When Scotty is telling you the story, every painful bit of reality he is describing becomes vibrant. So it is not hard to see why his (I’m just going to go ahead and presume a gender here) company is desirable in the agonising business we call surviving. 
 All Hannaham’s characters in this novel follow troubled paths through life. The action of Delicious Foods begins on the lam, dropping the reader right into what they might presume is a thriller. Eddie, another protagonist, is driving away from some undisclosed event. The only thing the reader knows for sure is that it was traumatic, because Eddie’s hands have been lopped off at the wrists. The pacing is immediately fast, and one expects shortly to encounter some kind of vengeance or reckoning scene. 
 But instead, at least initially, Eddie flattens all the bad feelings and frustrated history into a quiet life in the midwest. He actually manages to market his trauma to sympathetic white people with the slogan on his business card: he is a “Handyman Without Hands”. 
 That narrative turnabout is pretty much a thesis statement, because Delicious Foods is a book about the generative and degenerative powers of injury: physical, emotional, racial, political, economic. After a while, it becomes clear that Eddie’s hands were taken at a place actually called Delicious Foods. But before the narrative gets back to the scene of the crime, it pulls back through the years to Eddie’s parents meeting at college and their involvement in voter registration drives in the pre-civil-rights south. 
 Events from there are gruesome. Eddie’s father falls prey to white supremacists. This is not a John Grisham novel; no crusading lawyer brings Darlene justice, and she careens into a long relationship with Scotty in the aftermath. The costs of the descent of addiction and despair are borne by a very young Eddie in a blighted Houston. By the time Delicious Foods finally appears in the story, as a fruit-picking farm bearing the promise of steady employment, you can almost see why Darlene ignores the considerable red flags of their recruitment process. Danger has been a part of her atmosphere for so long it feels the only choices her life has allowed is between evils. 
 If this sounds grim in summary, Delicious Foods actually goes down pretty easily. Though treating upsetting and sad subject matter, the book often zips by on the fuel of Hannaham’s evident delight and pleasure in the mere process of storytelling. Other than Scotty’s presence there isn’t the least hint of the supernatural anywhere. But his novel has a kind of magical gloss nonetheless. 
 When it comes to the novel’s characters that gloss threatens to be a flaw; sometimes their edges seem overly smoothed out. In interviews Hannaham has made clear that it was his explicit project to break open racial stereotypes – in particular he’s said he wanted to upend the notion of the “magical Negro”, whose sentimental appeal often conceals the real trauma of racism at the heart. But even with good intentions, the depiction of a stereotype always runs the risk of reifying them. There are certain moments here – mostly with Darlene’s co-workers on the farm, none of whom get much further than silhouettes – where Hannaham skates right up to that line. 
 Nonetheless by the time you start to realise just how quickly you’ve been whipped along, the novel is over. And many of its images have stuck with you. The fact is that a story sometimes moves on archetypes; we’re often moved by them. Call it sentimentality if you like, but a kind of power attaches to moments where you suddenly see the symbolic power of the people in your life. 
 In fact, late in the novel, Darlene has just such a moment (still via Scotty): “Suddenly they was a trinity to her, some sacred folks who had manage to turn they rotten life into something of value, and she blamed herself for failing to do that shit in her own life.” It’s the only place in the whole book where you think she just might manage to get herself out of the mess. 
 
 
