In November 1938, exiled in New York, Theodor Adorno wrote to his friend Walter Benjamin concerning some pages the latter had sent from The Arcades Project, his vast prismatic study of 19th-century Paris. The text, Adorno complained, was ruinously addicted to the “wide-eyed presentation of mere facts”. Benjamin had been at work on the book – it’s not clear he intended a “book” as such – since the late 1920s, trawling the city itself and the Biblioth&egrave;que Nationale for images and anecdotes, setting thousands of quotations in devious array with his own reflections. These fragments orbited a central motif: the network of phantasmagoric shopping arcades that had flourished in Paris at mid-century. The only way to write about such things was in the collage style of a shop window. Benjamin tartly replied that, in accusing him of a stupefied empiricism, Adorno had simply identified “the true philological attitude”. 
 “Wide-eyed presentation of mere facts”: the phrase appears to suit the work, if that’s the word for so insouciant an oeuvre, of poet and theorist Kenneth Goldsmith. With Capital – both a challenge and a homage to The Arcades Project – Goldsmith extends (or does he extinguish?) a practice of borrowing and citation to which, since the mid-1990s, he has given various names, notably “conceptual poetry” and “uncreative writing”. Originality and expression are over, he contends: we’re in the era of literary sampling. Earlier projects involved verbatim transcripts of a New York radio station’s weather reports and of traffic bulletins; one volume recorded the author’s every spoken utterance during one week. Now, with the scholarly endorsement of the critic Marjorie Perloff – she was among the first to note an affinity between Goldsmith’s appropriations and Benjamin’s quotation hoard – he has composed a 1,008-page hymn to New York, created almost entirely from other people’s words. 
 Capital is a monumental, admirable undertaking: a richer, more surprising, frankly more readable book than Goldsmith’s blank conceptual gambit seems to promise. Here is “the capital of the 20th century” anatomised according to 52 diverse themes. Goldsmith begins with the familiar image of New York as dream city, a glittering vision that turns out to be real. (Surely, Joan Didion wrote of her own youthful arrival there, “one does not live in Xanadu”.) Among the teeming quotations on advertising and empire, sex and the subway, loneliness and gentrification, we get many passages on the visual blare of the city. Thomas Wolfe remarked the “great slant beacons of moted light” at Grand Central Station; Truman Capote wrote that being in New York was “like living inside an electric lightbulb”; F Scott Fitzgerald called the sight of Manhattan “a miracle of foamy light suspended by the stars”. 
 At its best, Capital scintillates, with celebrated and obscure writers. But Goldsmith’s method is also frustratingly slapdash. He fails to note when he is quoting one writer quoting another; when he hits on an eloquent source such as Peter Conrad’s The Art of the City, he relies on it for page after page: you may as well go and read the original book. Perhaps, as with his occasional recourse to Wikipedia, he is making a point: his democratic levelling mirrors street-level New York itself. The lapses hardly matter, in a way, when the book gives us such curiosities as wine cellars beneath the Brooklyn Bridge, or the public electrocution of the troublesome Coney Island elephant, Topsy, in 1903. Along the way, there are vivid descriptions from voices as diverse as American historian Lewis Mumford, Soviet poet Vladimir Mayakovsky and music journalist Legs McNeil. 
 The book stalls to a predictable gridlock – predictable chiefly because it seems to lead straight to the arrival of one K Goldsmith. I love Andy Warhol ’s moaning, gossipy, phoned-in diaries as much as the next masochist, but you have to wonder why appropriating Andy looms so large here. There’s an absurdly inflated section on Robert Mapplethorpe – no other artist gets the full chapter treatment – that leads one to suspect he functions as a personal talisman (or warning) for Goldsmith when it comes to uptown avant gardism. And in that chapter there is not one quotation from Patti Smith, who is reduced instead to Mapplethorpe’s muse – a reminder of the general scarcity of female writers and artists in Goldsmith’s collage. 
 Goldsmith probably doesn’t care if you notice such things; he famously considers his books unreadable. But anybody taking Perloff’s advice and reading Capital <strong> </strong>against the grain of its conceptual intentions<strong> </strong>would do well to have a small stack of other NYC books to hand: it might include Smith’s memoir Just Kids, Elizabeth Hardwick’s novel Sleepless Nights, Maeve Brennan’s essays in The Long-Winded Lady. Not only because Goldsmith has scanted or – as in the case of Jane Jacobs’s Death and Life of Great American Cities – simply ignored certain essential voices. But because, as Benjamin the rigorously seductive essayist well knew, assemblage is just half the work when it comes to capturing the modern city; the other half is style. Despite himself, Goldsmith has produced a book that reminds us how close we can still get, via the labour of sound and thought and syntax, to the rhythms of a real city. 
 