Near the beginning of this novel, which has been translated by Deborah Boliver Boehm, there is an image of the built environment imitating nature, as a steel train bridge forms a “canopy” over a canal. Soon, however, the urban is replaced by the rural, and the narrator is “walking along under a canopied row of cherry trees so heavily overgrown that hardly any light fell on the road”. Forests and floods rise up. This is a novel about a drowning in a river a long time ago, and about overwhelming waves of memory in old age. It is also explicitly about the late style of a Nobel-winning writer. 
 The narrator is Oe’s literary alter ego Kogito Choko, who is to Oe as Nathan Zuckerman is to Philip Roth. Choko is an internationally famous writer in his 70s, who is determined to write a novel about the day his father died near the end of the second world war. Choko senior had been plotting something with rightwing militarist friends at a training camp, and then one night set off in a small boat during a flood, and drowned. A red leather trunk filled with documents was recovered, and guarded fiercely by Choko’s mother while she was alive; now at last he can look into it. He returns to the rural Shikoku of his childhood, where he and his sister Asa have a “Forest House”. 
 There, however, they are invaded by a theatre troupe called the Caveman Group, led by one Masao Anai, who are putting on plays based on Choko’s work. They specialise in interactive performances where audience members throw stuffed dogs at the actors; their female star is a young woman called Unaiko, whose traumatic past will be unveiled in the book’s climactic performance. Meanwhile Choko is beginning to suffer attacks of vertigo, and has a terrible falling out with his disabled composer son, Akari. Then one of his father’s old disciples, Daio, turns up, and hints that he may reveal the truth about what they were all up to more than half a century ago. 
 This all proceeds in a meandering, looping, and often stifling fashion. Even once one has accepted the occupational hazard, in reading Japanese books in translation, of American slanginess (“down here in the boonies”; “Holy cow, Kogito”), it challenges the reader’s patience. Characters give long speeches to one another about Choko’s work. (“I was aware that you’ve taken a strong public stand against the resurgence of ultranationalism, especially through your essays and writings,” Unaiko tells Choko, perhaps unnecessarily.) Choko keeps wondering what he is going to write and how (“But what should I, the writer, have my drowning father remember – and in what sequence?”), and so does everyone else. Meanwhile, Asa writes long, detailed letters to Choko about the Caveman Group’s theatrical productions (with suspiciously exact recall of dialogue), and pages of reported speech are nested inside more reported speech, so that crucial scenes come third- or fourth-hand. Some mild suspense is introduced when a character promises to talk about something at greater length, but a bit later. On page 289, the narrator confesses: “As for my own brain, it was still completely devoid of ideas.” 
 One hopes this is all deliberate, and, at length, so it turns out: Oe wants the reader to get lost, too, in a forest of stories and competing memories. (He playfully signals the other characters’ impatience with the kind of novel they are trapped in: they are often rude to Choko about his own work, and he defends it as the only kind he can manage.) And through this rebarbative foliage appear some memorable visions: the young Choko watching his father set off in the boat accompanied by Choko’s own “supernatural alter ego”; a vision of glittering fish spied in an underwater grotto; a disturbing kitchen battle with a giant turtle. At length what seemed oppressively solipsistic widens out, almost imperceptibly, into a book that is also about politics, war and the place of women in modern Japanese society. 
 Death By Water is an art-haunted book, with much discussion of TS Eliot (the novel is named after section four of The Waste Land ), Beethoven, and Edward Said, and a brilliant reading of JG Fraser’s The Golden Bough as potential incitement to a military coup. The recurrent themes of water and forest (symbolising perhaps a place where one may get eternally lost, or simply death), linked in an anecdote about Choko’s father confusing two similar kanji (logographic characters), build until very late on, when an epic storm breaks. The reader has long since been lulled into accepting the pensive, discursive ambience of the text, but now a plot erupts, and ramifies in an extraordinarily vivid sequence of scenes. The ending is quite some coup. 
 