When a Provisional IRA bomb exploded at 2.54 am on 12 October 1984 in the Grand Hotel, Brighton, as it hosted senior delegates at the Tory party conference, it provided a moment of dramatic catharsis in Margaret Thatcher ’s prime ministerial career. That she survived the assassination attempt and went on to deliver the keynote speech later that day seemed to prove that the Iron Lady surely was indestructible. And the attack was the Provos’ most audacious operation against the British establishment. “Today we were unlucky, but remember we only have to be lucky once,” their communique quipped in a laconic, Clint Eastwood -style drawl. “You will have to be lucky always.” 
 This shocking event becomes the focus of Jonathan Lee’s hauntingly atmospheric third novel, though its own surprises are truly unexpected. As a prologue sets up the initiation of republican volunteer Dan, we anticipate a taut political thriller, but when the action moves to Brighton a very different kind of story evolves. Amid the melancholia of a seaside town at the end of the season we meet Freya, unsure of her next move having just finished her A-levels, and her father, nicknamed Moose, deputy general manager of the Grand, who is desperately hoping that accommodating Thatcher in his hotel will arrest his long, slow decline in life. 
 It is Moose who emerges as the truly tragic figure of the book. The title refers to the once promising diving career of a man now seriously out of shape. Soon after showing off to his daughter with a dive from the 10-metre board of the local pool, he suffers a minor heart attack. As he struggles to recover we learn of his break-up with a wife who found “she was married to a man who preferred to make a living out of falling into water. A man who was content to fall and fall.” 
 Lee is quite brilliant at excavating the disappointment of characters constantly chasing lost opportunities. Desire is deferred, sex postponed. Freya beds cute but vacuous Surfer John in exquisite anticlimax. “The unused condom lay there now on her yellow bed, in the thin light of the TV screen, like a dead jellyfish.” Dan chats up a woman in a Belfast bar while waiting for news of the explosion in a half-hearted attempt at seduction that we know will lead nowhere. “‘Lena’s not a common name round here, is it?’ ‘No,’ she said. ‘Are you disappointed?’” 
 The protagonists generate a static energy, gathering charged particles of the particular. Everything slows down and much elaborate description can become an inventory of inertia. But the momentum of the novel is building inexorably. The IRA used a long-delay detonator on the Brighton bomb and Lee employs this modus operandi himself, cleverly allowing their plot to provide his. Having planted this device we are left with the drama of waiting, a surface tension that holds the somewhat diffuse elements together. There are echoes of Beckett: “The sun, not knowing what was appropriate, had risen this morning as usual.” And there is another slow-burning fuse: that of Moose’s broken heart. A doctor tells him: “‘Look after it, or one day it’ll be total blackout. Ticking time bomb is what people say. Tick tick. Tick.’” From that moment we are instinctively aware that he is headed for his final fall. 
 High Dive is, of course, a historical novel, detailing events that took place more than 30 years ago, yet there is always a sense of immediacy to the prose; the research has been done, but it rarely obtrudes. Given Freya’s age, there are surprisingly few pop culture references, so when they come they tend to stick out: “She popped a fresh piece of Hubba in her mouth, wished she had brought her Walkman and her Whitney Houston tapes.” In homing in on the bleakness, Lee doesn’t quite conjure the passion of that time, the righteous anger that took us through that strange decade. And one simple factual mistake reminds us how much harder it is for the Freyas of today: Moose struggles to succeed so that his daughter “can go through university without having to stack shelves”. But at that time there were no tuition fees, and coming from a single-parent family, she probably would have qualified for a full maintenance grant. 
 The novel succeeds more in the intimate than the epic and is better at exploring the absurd minutiae of the hospitality trade than offering any coherent political analysis of the republican movement or the Tory party. “The napkins were conference blue, ordered especially from a supplier who’d seemed to understand Moose’s obsession with shades and textures.” In the mundane, Jonathan Lee finds the deep end, where all are diving for dear life. 
 
