Merritt Tierce ’s debut novel is a stylishly brutal account of the life of a waitress working in a series of Texas restaurants. The protagonist, Marie, suffers from a litany of misfortunes, whose sheer number may at first seem wearying: self-harm, compulsive promiscuity, drug abuse, squalid poverty, teen pregnancy. Furthermore, they are all introduced in the first 30 pages in a dizzying collage of vignettes. The prose is laconic, vernacular; at first, the book seems like a well-executed but predictable entry in the genre of trauma lit. 
 As it develops, however, it moves in a far more interesting direction. The story of Marie’s lost daughter, which initially seems to be the driving force of the book, is shunted to the periphery. The drugs don’t develop into an addiction/recovery narrative; the promiscuity does not lead Marie either to a violent end or an epiphany. In fact, none of these apparent plotlines turns out to be a plotline. They are there for atmosphere: the book is about Marie’s job. 
 For Marie, that job is an addictive chaos. The frenzy of a busy shift in an understaffed restaurant segues into the frenzy of drug-fuelled sex with two co‑workers in a speeding car. In a characteristic sequence, the manager pisses on the floor of the restaurant, then throws down his shot glass, shattering it, and calls casually for someone to clean it up; an act that is seamlessly absorbed into the restaurant’s rhythm. After all, as Marie tells us, every day the workers “take The Restaurant from pristine and silent down to a staggering state of chaotic, deafening and excessive disarray, and then put it all back together like no one was ever there”. 
 Marie’s promiscuity comes to feel like a natural part of this cycle. Sex scenes and restaurant scenes bleed into each other; they have the same dissociated feeling and adrenaline rush. Even in the most extreme situations, the tone is matter-of-fact: “There was the night with Casey and Florida John. They got me high and then played Call of Duty while taking turns with me. I stayed in the bedroom on the bed. I would do a line and then a bong hit and one of them would fuck me.” It is impossible to read some of these scenes without feeling terrified for Marie. We keep expecting insults and violence; the moment when casual sex becomes rape. But these men aren’t abusers, they are Marie’s comrades in abuse, and, with minor exceptions, they treat her with the casual respect due to a comrade. When her male co-workers refer to Marie’s willingness to have sex with anyone, they don’t say, “She’s a slut”, but, “She’s for real”. 
 Throughout, the story is elevated by Tierce’s fierce and elegant writing. The pace is that of a cocaine binge, and the voice moves from big-hearted to heartless to maudlin with the frank dispatch of a waitress dealing with a demanding dinner crowd. It is also quietly funny, as in a scene where Marie and her husband have sex on the floor, surrounded by their little girl’s toys: “When he came he kicked the door to her little plastic barn and it made the cow stick its head out with a loud electronic moo. We laughed.” The intimacy here almost makes us forget that they are both still teenagers, and that he has stopped eating after learning about her serial infidelities. 
 There are points at which the plot wanders – particularly in an interlude about a restaurant pianist, when the narrative shifts, jarringly and unnecessarily, into third person. Sometimes Marie’s voice feels a little glib; cool for cool’s sake. But these brief lapses scarcely matter: the scenes are too powerful, too real. We are unequivocally along for the ride. 
 It is also heartening to read an American novel that takes working-class life seriously. Here, the world of waiting tables is an arena large enough for tragedy and glory, and Tierce is not documenting the lives of its people from the viewpoint of an anthropologist, but singing them as their Homer. A waiter who coaxes exorbitant tips from his tables isn’t a sleaze, but an Odysseus; the disturbed veteran who inducts Marie into her first restaurant job is both a squalid, real person and a Charon. Nor does the heroic tone feel like hyperbole. It is the size of life seen from the inside – because we are never in any doubt that these are Tierce’s people. She is not just telling stories about them, she is bearing witness on their behalf, and she does so with a wholly writerly – that is, ruthless – love. 
 