The “Origin of Life” is a conundrum that could once be safely consigned to wistful armchair musing – we’ll never know so don’t take it too seriously. You will probably imagine that it’s still safe to leave the subject in this speculative limbo, without very much in the way of evidence. 
 You’d be very wrong, because in the last 20 years, and especially the last decade, a powerful new body of evidence has emerged from genomics, geology, biochemistry and molecular biology. Here is the book that presents all this hard evidence and tightly interlocking theory to a wider audience. 
 While most researchers have been bedazzled by DNA into focusing on how such replicating molecules have evolved, Nick Lane’s answer could be characterised as “it’s the energy, stupid”. Of all the definitions of life, the one that matters most concerns energy: the churn of metabolic chemistry in the cells and the constant intake of nutrients and expulsion of waste are the essence of life. Information without energy is useless (pull the plug on your computer); information could not have started the whole thing off but energy could. 
 It is widely recognised that the creation of a viable primitive living cell, capable of reproduction and Darwinian selection, has three requirements: a containing membrane, which acts as an interface between the organism and the environment; replicators able to store the genetic instructions for the organism and to synthesise its chemical apparatus; and a way of taking energy from the environment and putting it to work to run the cell’s processes. Lane shows how all the rest can follow if we put energy first. 
 He is a researcher in evolutionary biochemistry at University College London who has been developing his grand energy theory of life, the universe and everything for more than two decades, explaining it in the books Oxygen (2002), Power, Sex, Suicide (2005) and Life Ascending (2009), which won the Royal Society book prize in 2010. He is an original researcher and thinker and a passionate and stylish populariser. His theories are ingenious, breathtaking in scope, and challenging in every sense. To read him, it helps, as Richard Dawkins once said of himself when embarking on an intricate passage in The Blind Watchmaker, to bring your “mental running shoes”. 
 Lane’s research on the energy reactions of living cells has brought him to a theory that can account for some of life’s biggest mysteries: why sex? Why then only two sexes? Why do we age and die? Why are the mitochondria, the cell components that produce all our energy, only inherited from the female line (the male mitochondria being destroyed in the germ cells)? Why do those same mitochondria – once fully fledged, free living bacteria with at least 1,500 genes (before they merged with another cell 1.7-2bn years ago to create the possibility of multicellular life) – have only 13 protein-coding genes left? 
 Lane has the most plausible answers to these questions so far, but the greatest detective story is that of life’s origin. The evidence now is highly detailed: the essential biochemical machinery of life is known down to the last atom; the remarkable large protein complexes that catalyse the cascade of energy reactions have been, thanks to x-ray crystallography, charted in atomic detail. What these precise structures reveal are clues such as the existence of mineral centres in the otherwise proteinaceous complexes of life’s vital enzymes: iron sulphide is found at the heart of the respiratory enzymes. Why is that significant? 
 Because the most plausible location for where life on Earth began is the alkaline hydrothermal vents near the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, on the deep ocean floor, and other such formations. These structures, discovered only in 2000 after being predicted by the pioneering geochemist Mike Russell at Nasa’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, have the right credentials: masses of warm energetic minerals pour out of the ocean bed and form calcium carbonate chimneys full of micropores. In the conditions of the primitive world, they would also have contained the ingredients necessary to create organic chemicals, the precursors of life; the micropores would have contained and concentrated them and the hot chemicals that spewed forth, rich in iron and sulphur, would have created energy gradients. 
 Russell is one of the key figures in this developing story, along with Lane himself, Bill Martin at the University of D&uuml;sseldorf, and Lane’s colleague at UCL Andrew Pomiankowski. If Lane and his colleagues are right on the origin of life, what of the other puzzles: why do animals have sex, grow old and die? The answer, to paraphrase Kenneth Williams’s farmer character in Round the Horne, “lies in the mitochondria”. It is the biochemical mechanisms and structures that evolved from those energetic deep-ocean outpourings that power our cellular batteries, the mitochondria, today. You’re most likely to have heard of them through the recent controversial therapy of mitochondrial replacement. There might only be 13 mitochondrial genes left (the rest have all been incorporated in our main genome or rendered useless by mutation) but that still means that we have two genomes, not one. In fact, the commonly used but misleading term for mitochondrial replacement therapy – “three-parent babies” – would be better described as “Two Parents and 13 Genes Left Over from a 2bn-Year-old Mitochondrion”. Which isn’t to deny the significance of the mitochondrion and its 13 genes; as Lane explains, the subtle interactions between the two genomes can account for all the mysteries of multicellular life. 
 It might provide all our energy but, genetically, the mitochondrion is a cuckoo in the nest: it has its own genome and reproduces, bacteria-style, without sex. Sex evolved in order to shuffle our genes every generation, allowing us to keep good mutations and lose bad ones. But the energetic, sexless, cuckoo mitochondrion can’t do this. Bad mutations in your battery are extremely dangerous: that’s why most of the genes have dropped out of the mitochondrion into the main genome, so that they can enjoy the advantages of sex. The rump genes, though, have to be close to the mitochondrial machinery for the system to work and it is these genes, when faulty, that would be replaced in mitochondrial therapy. 
 Why do we only inherit them from the mother? Because her eggs are formed only once, at birth, whereas men make sperm throughout their lives, creating many more opportunities for mutation. This is why male mitochondrial genes are deleted in the sperm cells. Lane goes on to explain how our weird mitochondrial inheritance explains the other great puzzles. 
 There will be those who question the book’s title: “The Vital Question”? But intellectually what Lane is proposing, if correct, will be as important as the Copernican revolution and perhaps, in some ways, even more so. Life, seen in energetic terms, is a process of reducing carbon dioxide with hydrogen to create biomass and all the interesting consequences that follow from it (us, for instance). The future of life on the planet now seems to hinge on one life‑form (us again) learning to copy this process as a substitute for all that fossil fuel we’ve been burning. There’s a poetic symmetry in this (“in my beginning is my end”) and the work on the origin of life feeds the work on solar biosynthesis. But get this wrong and we’ll have to update TS Eliot: “Our end was our failure to learn from our beginning.” 
 
