As part of the publicity campaign for his first novel, Bed, David Whitehouse set up camp outside London’s Southbank Centre, got into his pyjamas and remained under the covers all day. It is hard to imagine how he might similarly draw attention to what happens in the follow-up, as it would require hijacking a local authority vehicle, abducting a 12-year-old boy and providing refuge to a dangerous fugitive on the run from the military police. Bed made for a peculiarly sedentary debut, as it focused largely on the inactivity of Britain’s fattest man. It flagged up Whitehouse’s engagingly offbeat powers of observation, yet the limitations for plot development were obvious, as it was a story that literally refused to go anywhere. 
 If anything, Mobile Library swings to the opposite extreme. It is packed with incident, some of it highly improbable – events unfurl with the madcap momentum of a children’s adventure story. The protagonist, Bobby Nusku, is a vulnerable and socially awkward boy who obsessively catalogues a collection of items relating to his dead mother in the hope that he will one day be able to reconstruct her from the pieces. He is bullied at school and subjected to brutal beatings from his father, though he finds a soulmate in Rosa, who has a severe learning disability and whose single mum, Val, has the keys to a mobile library where she works as a cleaner. 
 Val is horrified by the abuse Bobby receives at the hands of his neglectful father, though when he takes a bath at her house (which he is not allowed to do at home) she becomes targeted as a sexual predator who enjoys removing the clothes of other people’s children. Under the circumstances, spiriting a pair of minors away in a stolen library van seems unlikely to dispel suspicion, though the relationship that develops between Bobby and his friend’s lonely mum is both innocent and, at the same time, satisfyingly complex: “Val couldn’t decide whether there was a better or worse person to confide in than a child. On the one hand, the advice he could give was limited. On the other, the solace offered was profound.” 
 The situation becomes further compromised when they are joined on the road by Joe, an ex-serviceman living rough in the woods, who turns out to be a wanted criminal who has escaped from military prison. From this point, the reader is required to suspend an increasing amount of disbelief as the characters head north towards an abandoned private zoo. It’s remarkable, for instance, how effective a coating of white paint on the van proves to be in throwing the authorities off the scent. Local councils may be cutting their library services left, right and centre, but you’d think that someone might at least keep track of the licence plates. 
 Yet it is not difficult to forgive the book’s inconsistencies, as the library becomes a symbol of Bobby’s expanding imaginative horizons. As he reads Roald Dahl and Antoine de Saint-Exup&eacute;ry for the first time, the van becomes as much a vehicle of fantasy as the Little Prince’s biplane or James’s giant peach – both a sanctuary from the outside world and a store of limitless possibilities in which “the walls were lined with escape routes and exits, to deserts, space and oceans and to stranger places still”. 
 The book also offers some quietly profound reflections on the pressures of parenthood. Joe instinctively puts his combat training to use protecting “this slapdash family, the closest to one he’d ever known”. And the stresses and rewards of caring for a disabled child are well drawn. Val bridles at people’s frequent observation that she does “such a good job … as if her daughter were a machine to be operated”. Yet at the same time she acknowledges that the entire misadventure stems from the mistake of allowing her daughter to play outside the house, unsupervised: “It was that simple decision, one of millions over the years, which she knew she’d regret for the rest of her days. This was her experience of motherhood, something you can be good at for a lifetime, but only need to be bad at for a second.” 
 As with Whitehouse’s first book, ebullient flourishes of incidental detail pop out of the prose: “disco-ball dewdrops lit up the grass”; a dog’s tongue lolls “like an inflatable ramp from an aeroplane”. It is a style that, like the fugitives’ breakfast (“hot fat bubbles burst on burnt sausage skin”), can easily be overdone, though the book by and large avoids the mannerisms that made Bed feel a little lumpy. And with a narrative that reserves one final, unexpected reversal for the very last paragraph, Mobile Library proves that Whitehouse is capable of harnessing his extravagant daydreams to a genuinely compelling plan of action. 
 
